## SPECIAL COMMUNICATIONS

## American College of Sports Medicine Position Stand. Resistance Training Prescription for Muscle Function, Hypertrophy, and Physical Performance in Healthy Adults: An Overview of Reviews

BRAD S. CURRIER 1 , ALYSHA C. D'SOUZA 1 , MARIA A. FIATARONE SINGH 2,3 , CAROLINE V. LOWISZ 1 , ERIC S. RAWSON 4 , BRAD J. SCHOENFELD 5 , ABBIE E. SMITH-RYAN 6 , JEREMY P. STEEN 7 , GWENDOLYN A. THOMAS 8 , N. TRAVIS TRIPLETT 9 , TYRONE A. WASHINGTON 10 , TIMOTHY J. WERNER 11 , and STUART M. PHILLIPS 1

1 Department of Kinesiology, Faculty of Science, McMaster University, Hamilton, ON, CANADA;  2 School of Health Sciences and Sydney Medical School, Faculty of Medicine and Health, University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, AUSTRALIA;  3 Hinda and Arthus Marcus Institute for Aging Research, Hebrew SeniorLife, Roslindale, MA;  4 Department of Health, Nutrition and Exercise Science, Messiah University, Mechanicsburg, PA;  5 Department of Exercise Science and Recreation, CUNY Lehman College, Bronx, NY;  6 Department of Exercise and Sport Science, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC; 7 Institute of Health Policy, Management and Evaluation, Dalla Lana School of Public Health, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, CANADA;  8 Department of Kinesiology, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA;  9 Department of Kinesiology, Appalachian State University, Boone, NC;  10 Department of Health, Human Performance and Recreation, University of Arkansas, Fayetteville, AR; 11 Department of Exercise Science, Salisbury University, Salisbury, MD

## SUMMARY

CURRIER, B. S., A. C. D'SOUZA, M. A. F. SINGH, C. V. LOWISZ, E. S. RAWSON, B. J. SCHOENFELD, A. E. SMITHRYAN, J. P. STEEN, G. A. THOMAS, N. T. TRIPLETT, T. A. WASHINGTON, T. J. WERNER, and S. M. PHILLIPS. American College of Sports Medicine Position Stand. Resistance Training Prescription for Muscle Function, Hypertrophy, and Physical Performance in Healthy Adults: An Overview of Reviews. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. , Vol. 58, No. 4, pp. 851-872, 2026. Purpose: The aim of this overview of reviews was to determine the impact of resistance training (RT) prescription on muscle function and hypertrophy, utilizing evidence synthesis methods. It updates the American College of Sports Medicine 2009 Position Stand, 'Progression models in resistance training for healthy adults.' Data sources: Ovid MEDLINE(R) ALL, Ovid Emcare, Ovid Embase, Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, EBSCOhost SPORTDiscus, and Web of Science Core Collection current to October 2024. Eligibility  criteria: Eligible  systematic  reviews  synthesized  randomized trials  of  healthy adults (≥18 yr) who completed RT (≥6 wk; range: 6-52 wk), compared with a group that completed no exercise or an alternative RT program, and reported the change in muscle function, size, or physical performance. Results: We synthesized data from 137 systematic reviews (&gt;30,000 participants). Compared with no exercise (control), RT significantly improved muscle strength, size (hypertrophy), power, endurance, contraction velocity, gait speed, balance, and multiple physical function outcomes. Few RT prescription (RTx) variables affected primary adaptations. However, voluntary strength was enhanced by lifting heavier loads (≥80% one-repetition maximum), through a complete range of motion, for 2-3 sets, at the beginning of training sessions, and ≥2 sessions/wk. Muscle hypertrophy was enhanced by higher volumes (≥10 sets/wk) and eccentric overload. Power was enhanced by moderate loads (30%-70% one-repetition maximum), low-to-moderate volume (≤24 repetitions ⋅ sets),  Olympicstyle weightlifting, and power RT (fast concentric phase). Power RT enhanced physical function. Training to momentary muscle fatigue, equipment type, exercise complexity, set structure, time under tension, blood flow restriction, and periodization did not consistently impact training outcomes. Conclusions: Healthy adults should perform progressive RT, with variable prescription consistent with our findings, to improve muscle function, size, and physical performance. Muscle strength, hypertrophy, power, and  certain  components  of  physical  function  can  be  enhanced  by  manipulating  the  RT  variables  highlighted. Key  Words: HYPERTROPHY, PHYSICAL FUNCTION, RESISTANCE TRAINING, SKELETAL MUSCLE, STRENGTH

Address for correspondence: Stuart M. Phillips, PhD, Department of Kinesiology, McMaster University, 1280 Main Street West, Hamilton, ON L8S 4K1, Canada; E-mail: phillis@mcmaster.ca.

Submitted for publication February 2025

Accepted for publication September 2025

Supplemental digital content is available for this article. Direct URL citations appear in the printed text and are provided in the HTML and PDF versions of this article on the journal's Web site (www.acsmmsse.org).

0195-9131/26/584-851/872

MEDICINE &amp; SCIENCE IN SPORTS &amp; EXERCISE ®

Copyright © 2025 The Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc.  on  behalf  of  the  American  College  of  Sports  Medicine.  This  is an  open-access  article  distributed  under  the  terms  of  the  Creative Commons Attribution-Non  Commercial-No  Derivatives  License  4.0 (CCBY-NC-ND), where it is permissible to download and share the work provided it is properly cited. The work cannot be changed in any way or used commercially without permission from the journal.

DOI: 10.1249/MSS.0000000000003897

E xercise is crucial for health throughout the human lifespan,  and  muscle  strength  and  function  are essential components of fitness. Resistance training (RT), also known as strength or weight training, is a specialized method of physical conditioning in which muscles  are  exercised  by  contracting  against  external resistance,  such  as  free  weights,  machines,  resistance bands,  water,  or  body  weight,  through  isometric,  isotonic, or isokinetic actions, progressively increasing force output to improve muscular strength, power, endurance, and overall health and sports performance. The benefits of  RT  are  being  increasingly  appreciated  as  healthpromoting  behavior  (1,2),  but  were  perhaps  first  documented  to  be  beneficial  beyond  personal  strength development by Captain Thomas DeLorme, who recognized the benefits of RT in wounded soldiers (3). Beyond the hallmark improvements in skeletal muscle mass and function, the benefits of engaging in RT include reduced mortality and risk for and management of cardiovascular  disease,  cancer,  and  diabetes  (4-6),  reduced  depression (7,8), and improved sleep quality (9).

Most  guidelines  call  for  healthy  adults  to  complete 'muscle-strengthening  activities  at  moderate  or  greater intensity that involve all major muscle groups on two or more days a week' (2). Exercise programs are generally constructed by manipulating six factors comprising the framework FITT-VP: Frequency, Intensity, Time, Type, Volume,  Pattern,  and  Progression  (10).  Prescription  of variably  RT  variable  (RTx),  however,  involves  several variables within each category that are inherent to any practice of RT. However, a barrier to engaging in RT is that  people  and  practitioners  often  lack  understanding of  how  to  prescribe  RT  (5).  Thus,  RTx  guidelines  are required to support healthcare practitioners and exercise professionals when designing RT programs.

The American College of Sports Medicine (ACSM) 2009 Position Stand, 'Progression Models in Resistance Training for Healthy Adults' (11), summarized, at the time, the available evidence for RTx variables, providing guidelines to enhance RT adaptations. Research on the  topic  of  RT  has  expanded  significantly  since  the publication  of  that  Position  Stand;  in  fact,  a  simple PubMed  search  for  'resistance  training'  yields  over 30,000 new results since 2009, indicating a need for an update. Evidence synthesis methods have also advanced considerably, and both the current (11) and prior (12) Position  Stands  were  criticized  (13,14)  for  lacking evidence-based rigor. Hence, to provide contemporary, evidence-based guidance to minimize bias, an updated RTx Position Stand was required, utilizing contemporary search and evidence grading methodologies.

Provided ample systematic reviews and meta-analyses, an overview of reviews can systematically summarize an abundance of information (13). An overview of reviews (i.e.,  umbrella  review:  a  review  of  systematic  reviews)

is  a  systematic  collection  and  assessment  of  available evidence  that  provides  a  comprehensive,  user-friendly summary of a research topic, enabling practitioners and professionals to make evidence-based decisions without assimilating the results of numerous systematic reviews and meta-analyses (14,15).

The  purpose  of  this  overview  of  systematic  reviews was to provide an updated, evidence-based summary of the impact of RTx variables on various outcomes relevant to RT in healthy adults. The outcomes of interest included  muscle  hypertrophy,  strength,  power,  endurance,  contraction  velocity,  and  physical  function  (e.g., gait speed, balance, and stair climbing). The current document updates the ACSM 2009 Position Stand entitled 'Progression Models in Resistance Training for Healthy Adults' (11).

## METHODS

## Protocol and Registration

This review was prospectively registered on the International Platform of Registered Systematic Review and Meta-analysis Protocols (INPLASY202360071; https://inplasy.com/inplasy-2023-6-0071/) and conducted in  alignment  with  the  Preferred  Reporting  Items  for Overviews  of  Reviews  (PRIOR)  (16).  The  completed PRIOR checklist is contained in Supplemental Appendix 1, Supplemental Digital Content, https://links.lww.com/ MSS/D323.

## Eligibility Criteria

The complete eligibility criteria for systematic reviews to be included are shown in Table 1. Briefly, systematic reviews of randomized trials were included when healthy adults completed an RT program for at least 6 wk and were compared with a group that completed no exercise (control  [CTRL])  or  a  distinctly  different  RT  program (Table 2;  i.e.,  FITT-VP  component  different  between groups).  In  most  cases,  reviews  examined  people  with minimal or no RT experience (i.e., novice); however, some reviews included more advanced trainees. Previously, we showed that training experience had a minimal impact on strength and hypertrophy outcomes (17); nonetheless, much of the evidence synthesized here is  from  inexperienced trainees. 'Healthy adults' was operationalized as humans (≥18-yr old) with no defined disease(s), including obesity, sarcopenia, and physical frailty. Body weight-supported RT was a portion of some reviews, but was not studied as a stand-alone intervention except in the case of the Nordic hamstring curl. Standard, or nonspecialized, RT was defined as any RT in eligible reviews that was not specifically defined and thus excluded specific forms of RT, including power RT (explicitly stated concentric  phase  performed  as  quickly  as  possible), Olympic-style weightlifting (RT with Olympic-style lifting  movements),  and  velocity-based  RT  (movement velocity thresholds used to prescribe RT). We acknowledge  that  this  is  a  broad  definition  that  encompasses several variables, but we have used the definitions of the RTx provided within the reviews we compared. Eligible reviews needed to report the change of at least one muscle  function  (e.g.,  strength,  power,  and  physical  function) or muscle size (hypertrophy) outcome from pre- to postintervention.  Unless  otherwise  specified,  strength was voluntary isotonic one-repetition maximum (1RM) in the same mode as that in which the training was performed. Records were defined as a 'systematic review' if they were titled as an evidence synthesis (e.g., systematic review, meta-analysis, and umbrella review) or used a specific systematic search strategy and eligibility criteria. The included reviews were not separated by participant age due to the number of eligible systematic reviews that included  participants  with  participants  who  were  both younger and older than the cutoff of 55-yr old. Thus, our recommendations are evidence-based across all ages.

TABLE 1.  Eligibility criteria for inclusion.

|              | Inclusion Criteria                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |
|--------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Population   | • Healthy humans ≥18-yr old with no defined disease(s) • Any training status (novice or trained)                                                                                                                                                                                             |
| Intervention | • Resistance training interventions spanning at least 6wk with a minimum of 12 exposures • If a supplement, nutritional, or other cointervention (e.g., behavioral therapy, medication, counseling) is applied, it must be received by intervention and comparator groups                    |
| Comparator   | • Distinct resistance training prescription, as defined by FITT-VP (Frequency, Intensity, Time, Type, Volume, Pattern, Progression) principle, and/or • Nonexercise control group (performing no RT) and/or alternative exercise control conceived as a sham intervention (e.g., stretching) |
| Outcome      | • Reported pre-and postintervention change in muscle function (strength, power, endurance, contraction velocity, physical function) or hypertrophy between intervention and comparator arm(s)                                                                                                |
| Study design | • A systematic review (including overviews of reviews) of randomized trials with or without statistical synthesis (e.g., meta-analysis, network meta-analysis, meta-regression)                                                                                                              |

## Information Sources and Search Strategy

The systematic search strategy was executed in October 2024 in Ovid MEDLINE(R) ALL (1946 to current), Ovid Emcare (1995 to current), Ovid Embase (1974 to  current),  Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews (2005 to current), EBSCOhost SPORTDiscus, and Web of Science Core Collection. Trained librarians developed the  search  strategies.  Searches  conducted  on  the  Ovid platform were limited to English-language records, and no additional limits or filters were applied. The complete search  strategy  is  reported  in  Supplemental  Appendix 2, Supplemental Digital Content, https://links.lww.com/ MSS/D323.

## Record Selection and Data Collection

Four reviewers (B. S. C., C. V . L., A. C. D., and J. P . S.) independently screened all records (title/abstract and full text) and extracted data from eligible reviews in duplicate, with discrepancies resolved by group consensus. Relevant data from eligible overlapping records were included and extracted. Authors of reviews with missing data were contacted via email with a request for the missing data, and

TABLE 2.  Resistance training prescription variables.

| RTx Variable                | Definition                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |
|-----------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Frequency Load              | The number of days per week RT is performed. The amount of weight lifted per repetition and often prescribed as a proportion of maximal strength (e.g., %1RM) or maximal                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
|                             | number of repetitions possible with a given load (RM) Completing repetitions until volitional failure occurs when                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |
| Failure                     | concentric movement is no longer possible.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |
| Time under tension          | The amount of time supporting weight. Time under tension per repetition is the total time required to complete one repetition.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |
| Time of day                 | When RT is performed in the day (e.g., morning)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |
| Inter-set rest Exercise     | The amount of rest time between sets. The order of different training forms (e.g., aerobic and resistance) or specific RT exercises are performed within a                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |
| order Type Contraction type | training session. Blood flow restriction: Locally reducing blood flow to and from exercising muscles. Free-weight RT: Weights that can be moved in space freely (e.g., barbell). Machine RT: Machines permitting fixed movement (e.g., leg press). Unstable RT: RT performed on an unstable surface (e.g., pressurized ball). Variable load: Altering load mid-repetition. Eccentric overload: Increased load or time under tension during eccentric movement. Traditional: Proportionally completing both concentric and eccentric phases of a movement. |
| Technique Volume (sets)     | Olympic-style weightlifting: Snatch and clean-and-jerk movements. Partial range of motion: Performing RT through an incomplete range of motion, compared with RT as typically performed through the complete range of motion for the joint(s) involved in a movement. Power RT: Intentionally performing the concentric phase of each lift at maximal volitional speed.                                                                                                                                                                                   |
|                             | The number of sets (a group of repetitions without resting) completed per exercise. Drop sets: Performing sets to failure then reducing load and minimal inter-set rest.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
| Set structure               | Cluster: Traditional inter-set rest with preplanned intraset rest periods. Complex: Sets with heavy loads followed by sets with lighter loads. Contrast: Alternating heavy and light loads set-to-set. Rest redistribution: Short rest periods between each repetition. Traditional: Performing a set without rest until all repetitions are completed.                                                                                                                                                                                                   |
| Periodization               | Periodized: Manipulating RTx during a program to maximize adaptations. Block: Dividing program into multiweek blocks with distinct training goals. Linear (traditional): Increasing load and reducing volume during the program. Nonperiodized: Not manipulating RTx during the program.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
|                             | Undulating (nonlinear): Daily or weekly RTx manipulation.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |

%1RM, percentage of one-repetition maximum; RM, repetition maximum; RT, resistance training; RTx, resistance training prescription.

WebPlotDigitizer  (version  4;  https://automeris.io/)  was used if data needed to be extracted from figures. Record screening  and  data  extraction  were  completed  using the systematic review software Covidence (https://www. covidence.org/). The complete list of data items sought is  reported in Supplemental Appendix 3, Supplemental Digital Content, https://links.lww.com/MSS/D323.

## Methodological Quality Assessment and Evidence Synthesis

The  methodological  quality  of  each  included  review was  assessed  independently  by  two  reviewers  using  the AMSTAR (A  Measurement  Tool  to  Assess  Systematic Reviews)  tool,  which  yields  a  score  ranging  from  1  to 11 that incorporates assessment of publication bias (Supplemental Appendix 4, Supplemental Digital Content, https://links.lww.com/MSS/D323)  (18,19).  Outcome  data were  tabulated  as  collected,  and  no  sensitivity  analyses were conducted. Heterogeneity was reported as the I 2 statistic  (meta-analyses) or the fraction of reviews showing a significant effect (systematic reviews). An outcome-level (bottom-line)  statement  and  standardized  effectiveness statement (Supplemental Appendix 5, Supplemental Digital  Content,  https://links.lww.com/MSS/D323)  were produced  by considering the methodological quality and  extracted  data  (20).  Outcome-level  quality  of  evidence (QoE) was calculated using a method based on the Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development and Evaluation approach for primary evidence (21). This method  incorporates  the  design  (meta-analysis:  yes/no) and  methodological  quality  (AMSTAR  score)  of  each included review (Supplemental Appendix 6, Supplemental Digital Content, https://links.lww.com/MSS/D323). There remains no standardized method to evaluate the certainty of evidence in overviews of reviews (15,22), so a summary percentage scores were calculated to demonstrate the quality of evidence contributing to each conclusion. The summary percentage was calculated within each prescription variable for all three directions of evidence (impactful, not impactful, and cannot determine) by dividing the average QoE by four (the maximum QoE score) to yield a percentage score ranging from 0% (lowest possible QoE) to 100% (highest possible QoE). This method has been used in previous  overviews  of  reviews  (18,20,23).  The  effectiveness (impact) of RTx variables for each outcome was assessed based  on  standardized  effectiveness  statements  and  the quantity of evidence (24). The reviews, which contributed evidence  for  the  impact  of  a  prescription  variable,  were independently scrutinized to comment on favorable RTx parameters for improving each outcome.

## Overlap of Papers

An issue with overviews of reviews is the possibility of 'double counting' (or more) papers that are included in more than one review (25). Such counting may unduly affect  the  results  of  the  analysis,  resulting  in  spurious levels of precision and confidence in the outcomes (26). We employed the corrected covered area (CCA) index to quantify the degree of overlap between systematic reviews to be pooled in an overview of reviews (27). To obtain an estimate of the degree of publication overlap, we calculated the CCA for strength using the ccaR package (28), arguably the most relevant outcome of our analysis.

## RESULTS

## Included Reviews

The systematic search yielded 5751 records following  duplicate  removal,  and  137  systematic  reviews were included in this overview of reviews (Fig. 1). The AMSTAR  scores  for  included  reviews  ranged  from  1 (lowest) to 9 (highest) out of a possible 11 (Supplemental Appendix 7, Supplemental Digital Content, https://links. lww.com/MSS/D323). The conflict-of-interest statement for  each  included  review  is  reported  in  Supplementary Appendix 8, Supplemental Digital Content, https://links. lww.com/MSS/D323. The details, bottom-line statement, standardized effectiveness statement, and QoE for each review  are  reported  in  the  Supplemental  Appendices, Supplemental Digital Content, https://links.lww.com/ MSS/D323, according to the outcome.

## Strength

CCA analysis of strength across all  included  reviews showed only 'moderate' overlap, defined as between 6% and  10%  of  primary  papers  appearing  in  two  or  more reviews (27). So the results of our analyses for this variable (for which there were more reviews than for any other variable) were not unduly affected by primary data overlap.

The effects of RT versus CTRL on strength and the impact  of  distinct  RTx  variables  are  summarized  in Tables 3 and 4, respectively. The results for each review are reported in Supplemental Appendix 11, Supplemental Digital Content, https://links.lww.com/MSS/D323. Compared with CTRL, strength was impacted by engaging  in  standard  RT  (17,24,29-56),  circuit  RT  (57-59), elastic  band  RT  (60-62),  home-based  RT  (63,64),  and velocity-based RT (65,66). There were insufficient data to determine if eccentric flywheel RT (67), Nordic hamstring RT  (68),  Olympic-style  weightlifting  (69),  and  unstable  surface  RT  (70)  impacted  strength  compared  with CTRL. In comparisons between distinct RTx, strength was  positively  affected  by  training  session  frequency (24,71-76),  load  (24,77-84),  eccentric  flywheel  RT  versus standard RT (85), range of motion (86,87), volume (24,88-93),  and  exercise  order  (24,94-96),  but  strength was not affected in programs with lifting to fatigue/failure  (24,97-99),  machines  versus  free-weight  RT  (100), unstable surfaces (70), time under tension (24,101), time of day (24,102), inter-set rest (24,103), contraction type (24,104),  power  training  (82,105,106),  or  set  structure (24,107-109). There were insufficient data to determine if strength was affected by blood flow restriction (110-112), Olympic-style weightlifting (69), intrasession autoregulation (113,114), varied exercise selection (115), periodization  (24,116-118),  or  concurrent  training  (i.e.,  aerobic and RT in the same training session) (119-124).

FIGURE 1-Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) flow diagram of review selection.

<!-- image -->

The impact of unilateral RT on the untrained, contralateral  limb  (i.e.,  cross-education)  was  only  reported for  the  strength  outcome.  The  impact  of  RT  versus CTRL on strength in the untrained contralateral limb is summarized in Table 3, and results for each review are reported  in  Supplemental  Appendix  11,  Supplemental Digital Content, https://links.lww.com/MSS/D323. Unilateral  RT  impacted  strength  (125,126)  such  that strength  improved  in  the  untrained,  contralateral  limb. Comparing  RTx,  strength  was  enhanced  by  RT  performed  with  higher  frequency  (≥2 d/wk,  though  the upper limit cannot, from our analysis, be undetermined), higher loads (dose-response), eccentric flywheel devices compared with standard RT, full range of motion, higher volume (multiple sets), and at the beginning of training sessions  (compared  with  the  end  of  training  sessions). Strength  was  not  affected  by  RT  performed  with  contractions  to  muscle  failure/fatigue,  free  weights  versus machines,  unstable  versus  stable  surfaces;  fast  (&lt;2 s) versus  moderate-slow (&gt;2 s) contractions, morning versus evening training sessions, short (&lt;1 min) versus long (&gt;1 min) between-set rest intervals, eccentric versus concentric contractions, power training techniques, or different set structures (cluster and complex).

## Hypertrophy

The  impact  of  RT  versus  CTRL  on  muscle  hypertrophy  is  summarized  in  Table 3,  and  the  impact  of distinct  RTx  variables  is  summarized  in  Table 4.  The results  for  each  review  are  reported  in  Supplemental Appendix  12,  Supplemental  Digital  Content,  https:// links.lww.com/MSS/D323. Compared with CTRL, muscle  hypertrophy  was  positively  affected  by  standard  RT (17,24,30,32,33,37,38,40,42-47,50,127),  circuit  RT  (57,58), and elastic band RT (60,62). There were insufficient data to determine if eccentric flywheel RT (67) impacted muscle  hypertrophy compared with CTRL. In comparisons between distinct RTx, muscle hypertrophy was positively affected by contraction type (24,104,128,129) and volume (24,91,128,130-133),  but  muscle  hypertrophy  was  not affected  by  frequency  (24,73,74,128,131,134,135),  load (24,78-81,83,84,128,131,136), absolute fatigue/failure (24,98,99,128,137), blood flow restriction (110-112), variable loading (138), time under tension (24,131,139,140), power training (105), periodization (24,117,131,141), or exercise order (24,94,96,128,131). There were insufficient data to determine if muscle hypertrophy was influenced by eccentric flywheel versus standard RT (85), machine versus  free-weight  RT  (100),  single-joint  versus  multijoint RT (128,142), time of day (24,102,131), inter-set rest (24,131,143,144),  range  of  motion  (86,87,128,145),  set structure  (24,107,108,146),  intrasession  autoregulation (113),  varied  exercise  selection  (115,128),  or  concurrent training (119,120,122,124,147).

TABLE 3.  Resistance training forms that impact strength, hypertrophy and power when compared with CTRL.

|                                                   | Strength                                  | Hypertrophy                                                   | Power                            |
|---------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------|
| Standard RT vs CTRL                               | ✔                                         | ✔                                                             | ✔                                |
|                                                   | ↑ 26 reviews; n = 23,204 QoE = 73%        | ↑ 12 reviews; n = 14,924 QoE = 79%                            | ↑ 4 reviews; n = 1,001 QoE = 63% |
|                                                   | ? 3 reviews; n = 138 QoE = 50%            | ? 3 reviews; n = 437 QoE = 83%                                | ? 1 review; n = 152 QoE = 25%    |
|                                                   | ↓ 1 review; n = 488 QoE = 50% ✔           | ↓ 2 reviews; n = 775 QoE = 63% ✔                              | ?                                |
| Circuit RT vs CTRL                                | ↑ 3 reviews; n = 843 QoE = 92%            | ↑ 1 review; n = 236 QoE = 100% ? 1 review; n = 190 QoE = 100% | ND                               |
| Elastic band RT vs CTRL                           | ✔ ↑ 2 reviews; n = 1,921                  | ✔ ↑ 1 review; n = 236                                         | ? ND                             |
| Flywheel RT vs CTRL                               | QoE = 75% ? ? 1 review; n = 140 QoE = 50% | QoE = 75% ? ? 1 review; n = 104                               | ? ND                             |
| Home-based RT vs CTRL                             | ✔                                         | QoE = 50%                                                     |                                  |
|                                                   | ↑ 2 reviews; n = 892 QoE = 50%            | ? ND                                                          | ? ? 1 review; n = 88 QoE = 75%   |
| Nordic hamstring RT vs CTRL                       | ? ↑ 1 review; n = 112                     | ? ND                                                          | ? ND                             |
| Olympic-style weightlifting vs CTRL olympic-style | ?                                         |                                                               |                                  |
|                                                   | ? 1 review; n = 44 QoE = 75%              | ? ND                                                          | ? ? 1 review; n = 112 QoE = 75%  |
| Unilateral RT, cross-education vs CRTL            | ✔                                         | ?                                                             | ?                                |
|                                                   | ↑ 2 reviews; n = 1,194 QoE = 88%          | ND                                                            | ND                               |
| Velocity-based RT vs CTRL                         | ✔                                         |                                                               | ?                                |
|                                                   | ↑ 2 reviews; n = 870 QoE = 50%            | ? ND                                                          |                                  |
|                                                   |                                           |                                                               | ND                               |
| Unstable surface RT vs CTRL                       | ? ↑ 1 review; n = 172                     | ?                                                             | ?                                |
|                                                   | QoE = 75%                                 | ND                                                            | ND                               |

Improving  hypertrophy. Compared  with  CTRL, hypertrophy  was  improved  by  RT,  including  circuit  RT and elastic band RT (Table 6). Between RTx, hypertrophy was enhanced by RT performed with eccentric-only contractions (versus concentric-only) and higher volume (≥10 sets/muscle group/wk). RT did not influence hypertrophy performed  with  low  (1 d/wk)  versus  high  (&gt;5 d/wk)  frequency when total volume was equated; low (30% 1RM) to high (100% 1RM) loads; contractions to muscle failure/fatigue; blood flow restriction; varying loads during repetitions; fast (0.5  s) versus slow (8  s) repetitions; power training techniques; periodization (linear, undulating, and nonperiodized); or exercise order within training sessions.

## Power

The impact of RT versus CTRL on power is summarized in Table 3, and the impact of distinct RTx variables is summarized in Table 4. The results for each review are

|                                        | Strength                                                                               | Hypertrophy                                                                                    | Power                                                             |
|----------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Frequency                              | ✔ ↑ 4 reviews; n = 3,531 QoE = 69% ↓ 3 reviews; n = 608 QoE = 75%                      | ✖ ↑ 1 review; n = 200 QoE = 50% ? 2 reviews; n = 166 QoE = 38% ↓ 4 reviews; n = 3,177          | ? ND                                                              |
| Intensity: Load                        | ✔ ↑ 6 reviews; n = 6,574 QoE = 79% ? 1 review; n = 151 QoE = 100% ↓ 2 reviews; n = 734 | QoE = 63% ✖ ↑ 1 review; n = 231 QoE = 75% ? 1 review; n = 108 QoE = 75% ↓ 8 reviews; n = 5,340 | ✔ ↑ 2 reviews; n = 1,980 QoE = 75% ? 1 review; n = 151 QoE = 100% |
| Intensity: Fatigue/failure             | QoE = 63% ✖ ↑ 1 review; n = 199 QoE = 75% ↓ 3 reviews; n = 1,371 QoE = 83%             | QoE = 66% ✖ ↑ 1 review; n = 189 QoE = 100% ↓ 4 reviews; n = 800 QoE = 69%                      | ? ? 1 review; n = 150 QoE = 100%                                  |
| Type: Blood flow restriction           | ? ↑ 1 review; n = 460 QoE = 75% ? 2 reviews; n = 364 QoE = 88%                         | ✖ ? 1 review; n = 72 QoE = 100% ↓ 2 reviews; n = 587 QoE = 75%                                 | ? ND                                                              |
| Type: Eccentric flywheel               | ✔ ↑ 1 review; n = 332 QoE = 75%                                                        | ? ↑ 1 review; n = 160 QoE = 75%                                                                | ✔ ↑ 1 review; n = 235 QoE = 75%                                   |
| Type: Machine vs free-weight           | ✖ ↓ 1 review; n = 683 QoE = 75%                                                        | ? ? 1 review; n = 123 QoE = 75%                                                                | ? ND                                                              |
| Type: Single-joint vs multi-joint      | ? ND                                                                                   | ? ? 1 review; n = 65 QoE = 25% ↓ 1 review; n = 193 QoE = 100%                                  | ? ND                                                              |
| Type: Unstable vs stable surface       | ✖ ↓ 1 review; n = 438 QoE = 75%                                                        | ? ND                                                                                           | ? ? 1 review; n = 145 QoE = 75%                                   |
| Variable load Time: Time-under-tension | ND ✖ ?1 review; n = 140 QoE = 75% ↓ 1 review; n = 509                                  | ↓ 1 review; n = 408 QoE = 50% ✖ ? 1 review; n = 107 QoE = 50%                                  | ND ? ND                                                           |
| Time: Time of day                      | QoE = 75% ✖ ↓ 2 reviews; n = QoE = 75%                                                 | ↓ 3 reviews; n = 806 QoE = 58% ? ? 3 reviews; n = 336                                          | ? ND                                                              |
| Inter-set rest                         | 430 ✖                                                                                  | QoE = 75% ?                                                                                    | ?                                                                 |
| Technique: Contraction type            | ↓ 2 reviews; n = 982 QoE = 63% ✖ ? 1 review; n = 38 QoE = 75% ↓ 1 review; n = 1,051    | ? 4 reviews; n = 265 QoE = 44% ✔ ↑ 1 review; n = 868 QoE = 75% ? 2 reviews; n = 92             | ND ? ND                                                           |
| Technique: Range of                    | ✔ ↑ 2 reviews; n = QoE = 50%                                                           | QoE = 75% ? ↑ 1 review; n = 90 QoE = 75% ? 3 reviews; n =                                      | ?                                                                 |
| motion                                 | 1,262                                                                                  | 276 QoE = 33%                                                                                  | ND                                                                |
| Technique: Power training              | ✖ ? 1 review; n = 140 QoE = 75% ↓ 2 reviews; n = 670 QoE = 75%                         | ✖ ↓ 1 review; n = 336 QoE = 75%                                                                | ✔ ↑ 2 reviews; n = 863 QoE = 75% ? 1 review; n = 99 QoE = 75%     |

(Continued)

|                                                                                                            | Strength                                                                                      | Hypertrophy                                                                                                                     | Power                           |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------|
| Volume:                                                                                                    | ✔                                                                                             | ✔                                                                                                                               | ✔                               |
| Sets                                                                                                       | ↑ 7 reviews; n = 5,633                                                                        | ↑ 5 reviews; n = 2,267 QoE = 50%                                                                                                | ↑ 1 review; n = 454             |
|                                                                                                            | QoE = 71%                                                                                     |                                                                                                                                 | QoE = 75%                       |
| Set structure                                                                                              | ✖                                                                                             | ? 1 review; n = 181 QoE = 75% ↓ 1 review; n = 555 QoE = 75% ?                                                                   | ✖                               |
| Progression: Intrasession autoregulation Progression: Varied exercise selection Progression: Periodization | ? ↑ 1 review; n = 308 QoE = 75% ↓ 1 review; n = 356 QoE = 25% ? ? 1 review; n = 198 QoE = 50% | ? ? 1 review; n = 243 QoE = 75% ? ? 1 review; n = 95 QoE = 25% ↓ 1 review; n = 218 QoE = 50% ✖ ↓ 4 reviews; n = 1,414 QoE = 63% | ? ND                            |
|                                                                                                            | ? ↑ 1 review; n = 616 QoE = 75%                                                               |                                                                                                                                 | ? ND                            |
| Exercise order                                                                                             | ? 1 review; n = NR QoE = 50% ↓ 2 reviews; n = 1,075                                           |                                                                                                                                 | ?                               |
|                                                                                                            | QoE = 75% ✔                                                                                   |                                                                                                                                 | ND                              |
| Concurrent                                                                                                 | ↑ 4 reviews; n = 941 QoE = 88%                                                                | ✖ ? 1 review; n = 71 QoE = 25% ↓ 4 reviews; n = 759 QoE = 81%                                                                   | ? ND                            |
| training                                                                                                   | ? ↑ 2 reviews; n = 725                                                                        | ? ↑ 1 review; n = NR QoE = 50% ? 3 reviews; n = 351                                                                             | ? ↑ 2 reviews; n = NR QoE = 50% |
|                                                                                                            | QoE = 75% ? 1 review; n = 119                                                                 | QoE = 67% ↓ 1 review; n = NR                                                                                                    |                                 |
|                                                                                                            | QoE = 25% ↓ 3 reviews; n =                                                                    | QoE = 25%                                                                                                                       | ? 1 review; n = 18 QoE = 75%    |
|                                                                                                            | 354                                                                                           |                                                                                                                                 |                                 |
|                                                                                                            | QoE = 67%                                                                                     |                                                                                                                                 |                                 |

reported  in  Supplemental  Appendix  13,  Supplemental Digital Content, https://links.lww.com/MSS/D323. Compared  with  CTRL,  power  was  enhanced  by  standard RT (41,48-50,148). There were insufficient data to determine  whether  home-based  RT  (63)  and  Olympicstyle  weightlifting  (69)  impacted  power  compared  with CTRL. In comparisons between distinct RTx, power was affected  by  load  (77,149,150),  eccentric  flywheel  training versus standard RT (85), Olympic-style weightlifting versus standard RT (69), power training versus standard RT (82,105,148), and volume (148), but power was not affected  by  set  structure  (107,108).  There  were  insufficient data to determine if power was affected by fatigue/ failure (99), unstable surfaces (70), or concurrent training (123,124,151).

Improving  power. RT  improved  power  compared with CTRL (Table 6). Between RTx and power training, power  was  enhanced  by  RT  performed  with  moderate loads  (30%-70%  1RM),  an  eccentric  flywheel  device, Olympic-style  weightlifting,  and  power  training  techniques,  versus  standard  RT,  and  low-to-moderate  volume (repetitions ⋅ set &lt; 24). Power was not affected by RT performed  with  different  set  structures  (cluster  or  rest redistribution).

## Muscular Endurance

The  impact  of  RT  versus  CTRL  and  distinct  RTx variables  on  muscular  endurance  is  summarized  in Supplemental Appendix 9, Supplemental Digital Content,  https://links.lww.com/MSS/D323.  The  results for each review are reported in Supplemental Appendix 14, Supplemental Digital Content, https://links.lww.com/ MSS/D323. Compared with CTRL, muscular endurance was impacted by standard RT (41,54) and home-based RT  (63).  There  were  insufficient  data  to  determine whether  unstable  surface  RT  (70)  or  velocity-based RT  (66)  impacted  muscular  endurance  compared  with CTRL.  There  were  insufficient  data  to  determine  if muscular endurance was affected by load (82), unstable surfaces  (70),  power  training  (82),  volume  (82),  or  set structure (107,108).

Improving  muscular  endurance. RT  improved muscular endurance compared with CTRL.

## Gait Speed

impacted by standard RT (17,30,32,33,36-38,47,53,152155). There were insufficient data to determine whether elastic band RT (62) or power training (156) impacted gait speed  compared  with  CTRL.  In  comparisons  between distinct RTx, there were insufficient data to determine if gait speed was influenced by load (82) or power training versus standard RT (82).

Improving  gait  speed. RT  improved  gait  speed compared with CTRL.

## Timed Up-and-Go

The impact of RT versus CTRL and distinct RTx variables on gait speed is summarized in Table 5. The results for each review are reported in Supplemental Appendix 15, Supplemental Digital Content, https://links.lww. com/MSS/D323. Compared with CTRL, gait speed was The  impacts  of  RT  versus  CTRL  and  distinct  RTx variables  on  timed  up-and-go  (TUG)  performance  are summarized in Table 5. The results for each review are reported  in  Supplemental  Appendix  16,  Supplemental Digital Content, https://links.lww.com/MSS/D323.

TABLE 5.  Resistance training forms and prescription variables that impact physical function outcomes.

|                                  | Stair Climbing                 | Gait Speed                                                                                                              | Balance                                                           | Chair Stand Performance                                                                           | Timed Up-and-Go                                                                 |
|----------------------------------|--------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Standard RT vs CTRL              | ?                              | ✔                                                                                                                       | ✔                                                                 | ✔                                                                                                 | ✔                                                                               |
| Elastic band RT vs CTRL          | ND ? ND                        | ↑ 8 reviews; n = 3,407 QoE = 81% ? 3 reviews; n = 115 QoE = 50% ↓ 2 reviews; n = 1,660 QoE = 100% ? ? 1 review; n = 160 | ↑ 1 review; n = 406 QoE = 75% ? 2 reviews; n = 227 QoE = 63% ? ND | ↑ 2 reviews; n = 954 QoE = 88% ? 3 reviews; n = 291 QoE = 75% ↓ 1 review; n = 657 QoE = 100% ? ND | ↑ 5 reviews; n = 1,568 QoE = 90% ? 5 reviews; n = 479 QoE = 70% ? ↑ 1 review; n |
| Home-based RT vs CTRL            | ? ND                           | QoE = 75% ? ND                                                                                                          | ✔ ↑ 1 review; n = 1,484                                           | ? ND                                                                                              | = 154 QoE = 75% ? ND                                                            |
| Power training RT vs CTRL        | ? ND                           | ? ? 1 review; n = 165 QoE = 75%                                                                                         | ? ND                                                              | ? ND                                                                                              | ? ND                                                                            |
| Unstable surface RT vs CTRL      | ?                              | ? ND                                                                                                                    | ? ? 1 review; n =                                                 | ? ND                                                                                              | ?                                                                               |
|                                  | ND                             |                                                                                                                         | 138 QoE = 75%                                                     |                                                                                                   | ND                                                                              |
| Intensity: Load                  | ? ? 1 review; n = 84 QoE = 75% | ? ? 1 review; n = 38 QoE = 75%                                                                                          | ? ND                                                              | ? ? 1 review; n = 23 QoE = 75%                                                                    | ? ? 1 review; n = 38 QoE = 75%                                                  |
| Intensity: Fatigue/failure       | ? ND                           | ? ND                                                                                                                    | ? ND                                                              | ? ND                                                                                              | ? ND                                                                            |
| Type: Unstable vs stable surface | ?                              | ND                                                                                                                      | ? ? 1 review; n = 142                                             | ?                                                                                                 |                                                                                 |
|                                  | ND                             | ?                                                                                                                       | QoE = 75%                                                         | ND                                                                                                | ? ND                                                                            |
| Power training                   | ? 2 reviews; n = 142 QoE = 88% | ? 1 review; n = 79 QoE = 75%                                                                                            | ND                                                                | 3 reviews; n = 442 QoE = 83%                                                                      | ? ? 2 reviews; = 119                                                            |
|                                  | ?                              | ?                                                                                                                       |                                                                   |                                                                                                   |                                                                                 |
| Technique:                       |                                |                                                                                                                         |                                                                   | ? ?                                                                                               |                                                                                 |
|                                  |                                |                                                                                                                         | ?                                                                 |                                                                                                   | n QoE = 75% ↓ 1 review; n                                                       |
| Concurrent                       |                                |                                                                                                                         |                                                                   |                                                                                                   | = 227 QoE = 100% ?                                                              |
| training                         | ? ND                           | ? ND                                                                                                                    | ? ? 1 review; n = 45                                              | ? ND                                                                                              | ND                                                                              |

| Outcome                       | RT vs CTRL                                                                                                 | RTx to Enhancea Adaptation                                                                                                                                                                       |
|-------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Strength                      | Strength is improved by RT, including circuit RT, elas- tic band RT, home-based RT, and velocity-based RT. | Frequency: ≥2 sessions/wk Intensity: ≥80% 1RM (dose-response) Type: Eccentric flywheel RT Technique: Full range of motion Volume: 2-3 sets/session Exercise order: Beginning of training session |
| Hypertrophy                   | Hypertrophy is improved by RT, including circuit RT and elastic band RT.                                   | Type: Eccentric contractions/overload Volume: ≥10 sets/wk (dose-response)                                                                                                                        |
| Power                         | Power is improved by RT.                                                                                   | Intensity: Loads = 30%-70% 1RM Type: Eccentric flywheel RT Technique: Olympic-style weightlifting; Power RT Volume: Low-moderate (repetitions ⋅ sets ≤24)                                        |
| Muscular endurance            | Muscular endurance is improved by RT.                                                                      | ND                                                                                                                                                                                               |
| Gait speed                    | Gait speed is improved by RT.                                                                              | ND                                                                                                                                                                                               |
| Timed                         | Timed up-and-go is improved by RT.                                                                         | ND                                                                                                                                                                                               |
| Chair stand test              | Chair stand test performance is improved by RT.                                                            | ND                                                                                                                                                                                               |
| Balance                       | Balance is improved by RT.                                                                                 | ND                                                                                                                                                                                               |
| Stair climbing                | ND                                                                                                         | ND                                                                                                                                                                                               |
| Multicomponent function       | Multicomponent function is improved by RT, including elastic band RT and home-based RT.                    | Technique: Power RT                                                                                                                                                                              |
| SPPB                          | SPPB is not improved by RT.                                                                                | Technique: Power RT                                                                                                                                                                              |
| Walking performance           | ND                                                                                                         | Technique: Power RT                                                                                                                                                                              |
| Running performance           | ND                                                                                                         | Type: Velocity-based RT                                                                                                                                                                          |
| Jumping performance           | Jumping performance is improved by flywheel RT and velocity-based RT.                                      | Type: Velocity-based RT                                                                                                                                                                          |
| Contraction velocity          | Contraction velocity is improved by RT.                                                                    | ND                                                                                                                                                                                               |
| Change of direction (agility) | ND                                                                                                         | ND                                                                                                                                                                                               |
| Functional reach              | ND                                                                                                         | ND                                                                                                                                                                                               |

1RM, one-repetition maximum; CTRL, no exercise; ND, insufficient data to form conclusion; RT, resistance training; RTx, resistance training prescription; SPPB, Short Physical Performance Battery.

Compared with CTRL, TUG was impacted by standard RT (30,32,33,36,38,47,50,152,154,156). There were insufficient data to determine if elastic band RT (62) impacted TUG compared with  CTRL.  In  comparisons  between distinct RTx, there were insufficient data to determine if TUG was affected by load (82) or power training versus standard RT (82,106,157).

Improving  timed  up-and-go. RT improved  TUG compared with CTRL.

## Chair Stand Test

The impacts of RT versus CTRL and distinct RTx variables  on  chair  stand  test  performance  are  summarized in Table 5. The results for each review are reported in  Supplemental  Appendix  17,  Supplemental  Digital Content,  https://links.lww.com/MSS/D323.  Compared with  CTRL,  chair  stand  performance  was  impacted by  standard  RT  (30,32,33,36,50,152).  In  comparisons between  distinct  RTx,  there  were  insufficient  data  to determine  if  chair  stand  performance  was  affected by  load  (82)  or  power  training  versus  standard  RT (82,106,157).

Improving  chair  stand  test. RT  improved  chair stand performance compared with CTRL.

## Balance

The impacts of RT versus CTRL and distinct RTx variables on balance are summarized in Table 5. The results for each review are reported in Supplemental Appendix 18, Supplemental Digital Content, https://links.lww. com/MSS/D323.  Compared  with  CTRL,  balance  was impacted by standard RT (52,54,154) and home-based RT (63).  There  were  insufficient  data  to  determine  whether unstable surfaces (70) impacted balance compared with CTRL. In comparisons between distinct RTx, there were insufficient data to determine if unstable surfaces (70) or concurrent training (158) affected balance.

Improving  balance. RT  improved  balance  compared with CTRL.

## Stair Climbing

The  impacts  of  RT  versus  CTRL  and  distinct  RTx variables  on  stair  climbing  are  summarized  in  Table 5.

The results for each review are reported in Supplemental Appendix  19,  Supplemental  Digital  Content,  https:// links.lww.com/MSS/D323. In comparisons between distinct  RTx,  there  were  insufficient  data  to  determine  if stair climbing was affected by load (82) or power training versus standard RT (82,157).

Improving  stair  climbing. There  were  insufficient data  to  determine  the  impact  of  RT  on  stair  climbing performance.

## Multicomponent Function

The impacts of RT versus CTRL and distinct RTx variables on multicomponent function-the aggregate  performance  on  several  physical  function  assessments-are summarized in Supplemental Appendix 9, Supplemental  Digital  Content,  https://links.lww.com/ MSS/D323.  The  results  for  each  review  are  reported in  Supplemental  Appendix  20,  Supplemental  Digital Content,  https://links.lww.com/MSS/D323.  Compared with CTRL, multicomponent function was impacted by standard RT (17,24,42,45,159), elastic band RT (60,61), and home-based RT (64). In comparisons between distinct  RTx,  multicomponent  function  was  affected  by elastic band RT (61) and power training (105,157,160), but was not affected by time under tension (24) or volume (91). There were insufficient  data  to  determine  if the multicomponent function was positively affected by load (24), range of motion (87), or concurrent training (119).

Improving  multicomponent  function. Compared with  CTRL,  multicomponent  function  was  improved by  RT,  including  elastic  band  RT  and  home-based  RT (Table 6).  Comparing  between  RTx,  multicomponent function  was  enhanced  by  RT  performed  with  power training  techniques,  and  standard  RT  enhanced  multicomponent function compared with elastic band RT.

## Short Physical Performance Battery

The  impacts  of  RT  versus  CTRL  and  distinct  RTx variables  on  the  Short  Physical  Performance  Battery (SPPB) are summarized in Supplemental Appendix 10, Supplemental Digital Content, https://links.lww.com/ MSS/D323.  The  results  for  each  review  are  reported in  Supplemental  Appendix  21,  Supplemental  Digital Content, https://links.lww.com/MSS/D323.  Compared with CTRL, SPPB was not affected by standard RT (30). There were insufficient data to determine whether power training  (156)  had  an  impact  on  SPPB  compared  with CTRL. In comparing different RTx, SPPB was positively affected by power training (106,157).

Improving short physical performance battery. RT did not improve SPPB compared with CTRL. Comparing RTx, SPPB was enhanced by RT performed with power training.

## Walking Performance

The  impacts  of  RT  versus  CTRL  and  distinct  RTx variables on walking test performance (e.g., 6-min walk test)  are  summarized  in  Supplemental  Appendix  10, Supplemental Digital Content, https://links.lww.com/ MSS/D323.  The  results  for  each  review  are  reported in  Supplemental  Appendix  22,  Supplemental  Digital Content, https://links.lww.com/MSS/D323.  Compared with CTRL, there were insufficient data to determine if standard RT (30) or elastic band RT (62) impacted walking performance compared with CTRL. In comparisons between  distinct  RTx,  walking  performance  was  positively affected by power training (106,157).

Improving  walking  performance. Between  RTx, walking  performance  was  enhanced  only  by  RT  performed with power training techniques.

## Running Performance

The  impacts  of  RT  versus  CTRL  and  distinct  RTx variables on running performance are summarized in  Supplemental  Appendix  9,  Supplemental  Digital Content,  https://links.lww.com/MSS/D323.  The  results for each review are reported in Supplemental Appendix 23, Supplemental Digital Content, https://links.lww.com/ MSS/D323. Compared with CTRL, there were insufficient data to determine whether standard RT (48,69,161), eccentric flywheel RT (162), and velocity-based RT (66) impacted  running  performance  compared  with  CTRL. In  comparisons  between  distinct  RTx,  running  performance was positively affected only by velocity-based RT versus standard RT (65). There were insufficient data to determine if running performance was affected by eccentric flywheel RT versus standard RT (85), Olympic-style weightlifting versus standard RT (69), set structure (109), or concurrent training (123).

Improving running performance. Comparing RTx, running  performance  was  enhanced  only  by  velocitybased RT.

## Jumping Performance

The  impacts  of  RT  versus  CTRL  and  distinct  RTx variables on jumping performance are  summarized in  Supplemental  Appendix  9,  Supplemental  Digital Content,  https://links.lww.com/MSS/D323.  The  results for each review are reported in Supplemental Appendix 24, Supplemental Digital Content, https://links.lww.com/ MSS/D323.  Compared  with  CTRL,  jumping  performance was impacted by eccentric flywheel RT (162) and velocity-based RT (66). In comparisons between distinct RTx,  jumping  performance  was  positively  affected  by velocity-based RT versus standard RT (65), but jumping performance was not affected by set structure (108,109). There were insufficient data to determine if jumping performance was affected by load (81), eccentric flywheel RT versus standard RT (85), or machine versus free-weight RT (100). We note that jumping performance should not be considered as a proxy for muscle power.

Improving jumping performance. Compared with CTRL, jumping performance was improved by eccentric flywheel RT and velocity-based RT (Table 6). Comparing RTx, velocity-based RT enhanced jumping performance; however, jumping performance was not affected by RT performed  with  different  set  structures  (complex  vs cluster).

## Contraction Velocity

The  impact  of  RT  versus  CTRL  and  distinct  RTx variables  on  contraction  velocity  is  summarized  in Supplemental Appendix 10, Supplemental Digital Content,  https://links.lww.com/MSS/D323.  The  results for each review are reported in Supplemental Appendix 25, Supplemental  Digital  Content,  https://links.lww. com/MSS/D323.  Compared  with  CTRL,  contraction velocity was positively impacted by standard RT (163). In comparisons between distinct RTx, there were insufficient  data  to  determine  if  contraction  velocity  was affected  by  cluster  or  rest-redistribution  set  structures (107,108).

Improving contraction velocity. RT improved contraction velocity compared with CTRL.

## Change of Direction (Agility)

The  impacts  of  RT  versus  CTRL  and  distinct  RTx variables on the ability to change direction are summarized in Supplemental Appendix 9, Supplemental Digital Content,  https://links.lww.com/MSS/D323.  The  results for each review are reported in Supplemental Appendix 26, Supplemental Digital Content, https://links.lww. com/MSS/D323.  Compared  with  CTRL,  there  were insufficient data to determine whether standard RT (69) or  eccentric  flywheel  RT  (162)  impacted  the  ability  to change direction. In comparisons between distinct RTx, there  were  insufficient  data  to  determine  if  agility  was affected by Olympic-style weightlifting (69).

Improving  change  of  direction  (agility). There were insufficient data to determine the impact of RT on agility.

## Functional Reach Test

The  impact  of  RT  versus  CTRL  on  functional reach test performance is summarized in Supplemental Appendix  10,  Supplemental  Digital  Content,  https:// links.lww.com/MSS/D323. The results for each review are reported  in  Supplemental  Appendix  27,  Supplemental Digital Content, https://links.lww.com/MSS/D323. Compared with  CTRL,  there  were  insufficient  data  to determine  whether  standard  RT  (154)  impacted  functional reach performance.

Improving functional reach test. There were insufficient data to determine the impact of RT on functional reach test performance.

## DISCUSSION

Resistance training is a central component of exercise programs. It should be a core component of physical fitness programming, as it has broad-reaching benefits for muscular  health  and  physical  function.  This  overview of reviews summarized 137 systematic reviews to determine the impact of RTx variables on muscle function and hypertrophy in healthy adults. Compared with no exercise,  RT improves muscle strength, hypertrophy, power, endurance,  contraction  velocity,  and  performance  on several physical function tests (balance, gait speed, chair stand, and timed up-and-go; Table 3). Additionally, other forms of RT improve multiple outcomes compared with CTRL, including home-based RT, elastic band RT, power RT  (which  involves  performing  the  concentric  phase quickly),  velocity-based  RT,  and  circuit  RT  (Table 3). Based on these results, it is apparent that many forms of RT work to promote the primary hallmark outcomes of RT: increased strength, hypertrophy, and power. Our primary recommendation is that healthy adults perform RT with high effort (effort can be measured through various scales, but can be achieved with various loads and sets per the FITT-VP principle) at least twice weekly, with all major muscle groups being engaged.

Between distinct RT programs, only some RTx variables  can  be  altered  to  optimize  increases  in  muscle function  and  hypertrophy  (Tables 4  and  6).  Significant and  optimal  improvements  are  two  different  goals; however,  participants  and  facilitators  of  RT  must  distinguish  between  them.  Compared  with  CTRL,  significant  improvements  in  muscle  function,  hypertrophy, and  physical  performance  can  be  accomplished  with the  adoption  of  many  RT  programs.  This  overview  of reviews  enhances  the  quality  of  recommendations  for healthy adults to significantly increase muscle function, hypertrophy, and physical performance by providing current,  comprehensive,  and  evidence-based  insights  into the impact of RTx variables.

Progressive  overload  is  a  concept  considered  fundamental to RT programming principles. Progressive overload refers to the need to increase the stimulus (stressor) placed upon the muscle throughout a training program. Progressive  overload  is  often  proposed  as  essential  for continued  adaptive  progress  with  any  form  of  exercise training  as  physiological  systems  adapt  to  reduce  the stress  of  the  exercise  and  build  an  increasing  adaptive response (i.e., strength). Such adaptation would require increasing  the  stimulus,  such  as  load,  volume,  training frequency,  exercise  selection,  or  duration  (even  if  only slightly), as the muscle continues to adapt to produce further adaptations (164). Modifying an RTx (e.g., increasing relative load [percentage of one-repetition maximum, %1RM]) can support progressive overload. Still, the same relative load can also be sustained when regular strength testing is performed or perceived exertion scales are used to  increase  absolute  load  commensurate  with  strength gains (113,165). Notably, as the results in Table 4 highlight,  progression  is  not  necessary  to  achieve  beneficial outcomes, and overload, or more accurately, increasing the stimulus in some manner, is likely a requirement only for  those  seeking  continued  longer  term  progress.  We note that in some populations, due to inexperience (and potential  safety  concerns),  RTx  necessitates  that  loads are necessarily low and progression is a requirement to achieve  a  meaningful  benefit.  Continued  progression could be a personal decision and part of the individualization of RTx (see below). A similar commentary could be made around the 'need' for variation of RTx variables (see below).

The principle of specificity states that training adaptations  are  specific  to  the  training  stimulus  applied. Some  adaptations  can  be  affected  by  modifying  RTx variables,  although  there  is  a  considerable  carryover of  training  effects  on  general  muscular  performance in  various  domains  in  nonadvanced  trainees  (17,24). Individualization  involves  modifying  RT  programs  to meet  the  unique  goals,  needs,  and  characteristics  of each  individual,  such  as  their  experience  and  performance level. Individualized programs can increase exercise adoption and adherence (10), but individualization has been scarcely discussed in previous Position Stands (11,12). With the accumulation of evidence demonstrating that many forms of RT are effective for healthy adults to  improve  muscle  function  and  health,  RT  programs would ideally be individualized to maximize adherence, enjoyment, safety,  and  effectiveness  specific  to  training goals.

Variation is the systematic modification of RTx variables over time to facilitate continued adaptation. One of the most common forms of variation is periodizationintentionally modifying prescription variables (e.g., load,  volume,  frequency)  throughout  an  RT  program. The  impact  of  periodization  on  strength  could  not  be determined, although one review found that periodized programs were slightly favored over nonperiodized programs to maximize strength gains under volume-equated conditions (117). With appropriate progressive overload, periodization  is  not  significantly  superior  to  nonperiodized  programs;  thus,  periodization  is  less  important than previously hypothesized (11,12) for healthy adults to  improve  muscle  function  and  hypertrophy.  We  note, however, that definitions of periodization vary (166,167), but broadly involve the systematic manipulation of RTx variables with the goal of optimizing performance adaptations, managing fatigue, preventing overtraining/injury, and peaking for specific goals. Thus, it may be that the ordering of variables within a given RTx to achieve certain goals is understudied compared with the outcomes contained  in  the  reviews  we  examined.  We  also  note that periodization and programming are often conflated (168), which may have been the case in some reviews.

Resistance training improves numerous measures of muscle function and can result in hypertrophy compared with no exercise (Fig. 2).  Provided  the  strikingly low  RT  participation  levels  (169-173),  individuals  and practitioners alike should acknowledge the tremendous benefits  of  completing  RT  of  various  forms  compared with no exercise. Additionally, nontraditional forms of RT also yield marked benefits-for example, elastic band RT  has  been  shown  to  increase  strength,  hypertrophy, and certain components of physical function. Similarly, home-based RT improved strength, muscular endurance, and balance. Nontraditional forms of RT may provide alternative,  perhaps  more  accessible  or  approachable, strategies  for  completing  RT  with  appreciable  physical benefits.

We build on several aspects of the 2009 ACSM Position Stand (11), which aimed to provide evidence-based RTx guidelines for healthy adults wishing to progress beyond the  first  3-4  months  of  training.  Previous  guidelines have recommended healthy adults use free weights and machines to complete two to three RT sessions per week, with eight to ten exercises involving major muscle groups per session, one to four sets per exercise, eight to twenty repetitions per set, 2-3 min rest between sets, loads 40%70% 1RM, and follow the principles of progressive overload, specificity, and variation (10,11). Current estimates (from self-report) are that only ~30% of American adults complete some muscle-strengthening activities at least 2 d/ wk, and nearly 60% complete no muscle-strengthening exercise  (169-173).  Estimates  for  older  persons  vary; however, data from the UK, United States, and Australia put participation rates from as low as 1% to as high as 40% (174). We suspect that rates of participation among older persons for the types of RT programs we outline here are likely 10%-15% (175). Notably, others have estimated that developing general muscular fitness (strength, hypertrophy,  and  power)  according  to  previous  ACSM guidelines may, in some cases, require training for 20 h or more per week (176). Thus, the recommendations of the previous Position Stand (10,11) may be less relevant for most adults, particularly older adults, many of whom do not engage in RT. The specific program details outlined in previous Position Stands may be an appropriate starting point for some individuals; however, several other RT programs, as evidenced here, can also be effective.

Deviating from previous guidelines, we propose that individualizing  programs  to  increase  RT  participation is, from our perspective, more important than conforming to specific RTx criteria outlined in previous Position Stands. Research on RTx reveals that 'minimal doses' of RT are able to bring about substantial strength, hypertrophy, and physical functional gains (177). We propose that our stance around encouraging participation in RT is  underscored  by  the  expanding  knowledge  of  health benefits, some of which are unique to RT (4-6). The recommendations  presented  here  apply  to  healthy  adults, ranging from complete novices (with no experience with RT) to experienced trainees, and support the adoption of  a  much  broader  range  of  RT  programs  to  improve overall  muscular  strength,  function,  and  hypertrophy. Advances enable a more comprehensive understanding of  how  RTx  variable  manipulation  affects  outcomes. For example, the previous Position Stand recommended novice lifters complete two to three full-body sessions per week for muscle hypertrophy, and this recommendation was graded as the highest  possible  quality  of  evidence (11).  However,  this  recommendation  was  informed  by only three studies (178-180) ( n = 59 total participants), and  two  of  the  studies  did  not  investigate  frequency (178,179). In contrast, we present guidelines suitable for many healthy adults,  supported  by  ample  primary  evidence, that were formulated with leading evidence synthesis methodologies.

FIGURE 2-Schematic representation of the modes of RT and the outcomes that are positively influenced by engaging in regular RT.

<!-- image -->

Resistance training is safe for healthy adults of all ages (5), but many adults, particularly older adults, avoid RT due to misperceptions about safety and injury risks (181). In an analysis of &gt;38,000 participants (&gt;6700 RT participants), of which &gt;11,000 were older adults, exercise did not increase the risk of serious adverse events. The risk of  nonserious  adverse  events  (e.g.,  pain,  fatigue,  bursitis, and edema) was not different than aerobic exercise in terms of injury rate or risk (182). Nonfatal cardiovascular complications also occur much less frequently during RT than aerobic training (5,183). In 23 studies ( n = 1174) of  adults  with  coronary  heart  disease,  all  63  nonfatal cardiovascular  complications  occurred  during  aerobic training, and the 20 musculoskeletal complications that occurred  during  RT  were  caused  by  preexisting  conditions (knee arthritis) and were resolved by changing RT intensity or body position (183). Clearly, RT can be safe and effective for healthy adults of all ages.

This overview of reviews summarized RTx variablelevel  evidence,  an  approach  that  prevents  statistical insights  into  the  comparative  effectiveness  (e.g.,  doseresponse)  of  individual  RT  variables.  Nuanced  details of RT protocols and dose-response data require discussion for practitioners designing RT programs to enhance adaptations, since some features of RTx are not reflected in variable-level summaries. For example, RT frequency was found to impact strength; however, there was insufficient evidence to conclude a dose-response relationship, and  the  impact  is  diminished  when  volume  is  equated (73,76,90).

Load  (often  used  synonymously  with  intensity)  has repeatedly  been  shown  to  impact  strength  more  than other  RT  adaptations  (17,83,184).  Load  has  typically been  quantified  as  a  %1RM  or  repetition  maximum. Several methods have been used to convert loads between %1RM and repetition maximum (17,184,185), including a recent analysis that considered exercise-specific conversions and between-subject variability (186). The number of repetitions performed within a given set is inherently and  inversely  related  to  load,  provided  a  given  load and  near-fatiguing  effort  are  applied;  however,  not  all adaptations are enhanced by fatiguing efforts (e.g., power and strength). Practitioners should consider the principle of specificity when designing RT programs to achieve specific outcomes.

Increasing  the  number  of  sets  (volume)  per  exercise positively  impacted  strength  (88-93)  and  hypertrophy (24,128,131-133),  which  aligns  with  a  recent  analysis by  Swinton  et  al.  (184).  Clearly,  one  set  is  superior  to zero sets (CTRL), and two sets are superior to one set (17,24,88-93,128,131-133), but the exact number of sets required to optimize adaptations cannot be ascertained. A meta-regression (187) of the effect of volume (weekly) sets showed progression, but as expected, a dose-response that plateaued and showed diminishing returns beyond ~2-3  sets/exercise  for  strength  and  ~18-20  weekly  sets for hypertrophy with varying loads; thus, healthy adults are  advised  to  complete  at  least  two  sets  per  exercise. Completing more than two sets per exercise may provide additional benefits, but we hypothesize that these benefits  diminish  with  each  subsequent  set.  Weekly  volume load-the total amount of load lifted in each week of training,  defined  by  load/rep  ·  reps/set  ·  sets/exercise  · exercises/session · sessions/week-which would presumably represent the complete representation of 'dose' of RT-was rarely considered in included reviews.

Completing sets to fatigue (momentary muscular failure) does not enhance gains in strength, hypertrophy, and power, and so is not necessary for benefits to occur. It may also be that lifting to fatigue is inadvisable for certain populations (e.g., older individuals) due to risks to vascular health and an increased risk of injury resulting from poor form (24,97-99). We propose that an adequate stimulus  (the  effort  to  meet  the  minimum  stressor)  is required to induce adaptations. Sufficient effort (assessed using  various  scales)  can  be  accomplished  by  completing  sets  with  various  RTx  and  completion  of  'nearfailure'  or  a  target  of  2-3  repetitions  in  reserve  (RIR) (24,97-99,128,137,188-190).

Blood flow restriction protocols often compare different  loads  (e.g.,  higher  load  RT  versus  BFR  with  lower load), so the individual effect of BFR cannot be distinguished from the load in many cases. Similarly, flywheel RT typically involves eccentric overload, so the individual  effect  of  flywheel  RT  and  contraction  type  cannot be  distinguished.  Evidence-based  conclusions  on  these matters  cannot  be  determined  with  the  available  data, but consideration is warranted when designing RT programs  and  conducting  future  research.  Notably,  these considerations can be largely overlooked when designing RT programs for most adults who are inexperienced with RT. Untrained individuals will benefit from various RT programs, provided that progression, the variables outlined here as affecting outcomes, and adherence are core principles.

Limitations  should  be  considered  when  interpreting the results presented in this analysis. Overviews of reviews provide  strong  (larger  or  consistent  effects)  pooled, group-level evidence, so that appropriate deviations from the reported recommendations will be required on various occasions, in accordance with the principle of individualization.  We  acknowledge  that  any  RT  program would need to be tailored to an individual's needs and goals. Not discussed here, but of paramount importance, is the understanding and acknowledgment of the critical role adherence plays in any RT program. Such considerations are beyond the scope of this review, but work has been done to examine this important area (191,192).

The  totality  of  evidence  in  overviews  of  reviews  is limited  to  interventions  and  outcomes  summarized  by systematic reviews.  For  example,  the  Short  Physical Performance  Battery  (SPPB)  is  a  common  assessment used  in  randomized  trials;  however,  only  two  eligible reviews have synthesized the results of the SPPB. When evaluating the results of this review, it would lead one to conclude that RT does not improve SPPB performance; however, this conclusion likely reflects the sparseness of evidence, rather than a true null effect. We note that there was  ample  evidence  for  individual  components  of  the SPPB-gait speed, balance,  and  chair  stand  tests-and RT improved all these components. Overviews of reviews are also limited by overlapping evidence. While we estimated this overlap using the CCA method for strength, we  did  not  do  so  for  other  variables.  We  acknowledge that caution is needed when examining other outcomes for which we provide no CCA analysis. Individual studies included in multiple eligible reviews could inflate the evidence supporting or refuting conclusions; for example, three reviews were included on the impact of RT time of day on hypertrophy (24,102,131), but two reviews (24,131) synthesized one original review (102). Overlapping data are  an  issue  in  overviews  of  reviews,  and  methods  are being developed to improve exercise-related overviews of reviews  (193,194).  Overviews  of  reviews  do  not  permit inferences about the comparative effectiveness of different interventions (14). This review summarizes the individual impact of RTx variables; however, alternative data synthesis  methods  are  required  to  formulate  evidencebased conclusions on the relative effects of multiple RTx. For  example,  network  meta-analysis  can  be  leveraged to statistically compare and rank the efficacy of unique RT  programs  (17).  Reviews  included  in  this  overview of reviews were limited to healthy adults. Provided sufficient  evidence,  future  guidelines  can  be  developed  for additional  subpopulations  (e.g.,  older  adults  and  clinical populations). There was insufficient evidence to form recommendations on emerging RTx strategies; for example, various minimal-dose RT programs warrant further investigation and consideration when individualizing RT programs (195). The method of testing muscular endurance  (e.g.,  absolute  vs  relative,  pre-  vs  postintervention strength) was not accounted for in the data synthesis and should be considered when designing future studies (196).

Methods to quantify load based on proximity to muscular failure (e.g., RIR, perceived exertion) are appealing because they could translate to various RT forms (e.g., elastic band or body weight RT). While training to failure is  not  obligatory for optimizing results, there is insufficient evidence to quantify exact RIR and perceived exertion  targets  (189,190,197,198).  The  available  evidence did not compare distinct body regions or muscle groups. In  the  view  of  the  authors,  applying  the  recommendations herein to the body regions 'upper' and 'lower' for 'push'  and  'pull'  exercises  (i.e.,  four  body  regions)  is sufficient to target major muscle groups. The movement directions 'horizontal' and 'vertical' may also be considered for upper body exercises (i.e., six body regions). The regions and movements we recommend should align with  the  FITT-VP  principle  in  terms  of  RTx,  which could  be  a  per-training-session  requirement  or  a  perweek requirement, depending on individual goals, training status, age, and other relevant variables.

We also need to acknowledge that randomized trials in  sports  and  exercise  medicine-related  fields  are  often poor quality with small sample sizes, poor randomization methodology, lack of preregistration, poor reporting  of  adverse  events,  and  other  shortcomings  (199), and much remains to be done in terms of the conduct of  evidence  syntheses  (200,201).  Guidelines  have  been developed to improve the reporting of exercise trials, and we would encourage their adoption (202). Consequently, cohesive  QoE  evaluations,  such  as  pooling  Grading of  Recommendations  Assessment,  Development  and Evaluation  assessments  (14),  were  not  possible.  Fieldspecific  guidelines  for  evidence  syntheses  have  emerged and will continue to be developed (203). Nonetheless, to improve the quality of evidence that informs guidelines and best practices as a field, a higher, more rigorous standard of trial conduct and evidence syntheses are required in the field of RT.

This overview of reviews represents, to date, the most comprehensive summary of the impact of RTx variables on muscle function and hypertrophy in healthy adults. RT greatly enhances overall muscular health compared with no exercise, and only a few RTx variables can be manipulated  to  enhance  adaptations  in  experienced  trainees. Therefore, individuals should prioritize completing any form of RT to improve muscle function and hypertrophy.  Exercise  and  healthcare  practitioners  can  provide invaluable  guidance  by  leveraging  these  conclusions  to promote RT participation and adherence, helping adults of all ages improve their health and fitness.

This article is being published as an official pronouncement of the American College of Sports Medicine. This pronouncement was reviewed for the American College of Sports Medicine by membersat-large and the Pronouncements Committee. Care has been taken to  confirm  the  accuracy  of  the  information  presented  and  to  describe generally accepted practices. However, the authors, editors, and  publisher  are  not  responsible  for  errors  or  omissions  or  for any consequences from the application of the information in this publication and make no warranty, expressed or implied, with respect to the currency, completeness, or accuracy of the contents of  the  publication. The application of this information in a particular  situation  remains  the  professional  responsibility  of  the  practitioner; the clinical treatments described and recommended may not be considered absolute and universal recommendations. B. S. C. was supported by an Alexander Graham Bell Canada Graduate Scholarship-Doctoral. S. M. P . thanks the Canada Research Chairs program  for  its  support  and  acknowledges  grant  support  from NSERC and CIHR. No specific source of funding was used for this work. B. J. S. formerly served on the scientific advisory board for Tonal Corporation, a manufacturer of fitness equipment. No other authors reported conflicts relevant to this work. M. A. F . S., E. S. R., B. J. S., A. E. S. R., G. A. T., N. T. T., T. A. W., T. J. W., and S. M. P . designed and conceived the review; B. S. C. undertook the search of articles; B. S. C., A. C. D., C. V. L., and J. S. extracted data; B. S. C. synthesized data; B. S. C., M. A. F . S., E. S. R., B. J. S., A. E. S. R., G. T., N. T. T., T. A. W., T. J. W., and S. M. P . reviewed evidence recommendations; B. S. C. and S. M. P . wrote manuscript; B. S. C., A. C. D., M. A. F . S., C. V. L., E. S. R., B. J. S., A. E. S. R., J. S., G. A. T., N. T. T., T. A. W., T. J. W., and S. M. P . reviewed manuscript. The results of the study are presented clearly, honestly, and without fabrication, falsification, or inappropriate data manipulation. The results of the present study do not constitute endorsement by the American College of Sports Medicine.

## REFERENCES

1.  Phillips  SM, Ma JK, Rawson ES. The coming of age of resistance  exercise  as  a  primary  form  of  exercise  for  health. ACSM'S Health Fit J . 2023;27(6):19-25.
2.  World Health Organization. WHO Guidelines on Physical Activity  and  Sedentary  Behaviour .  World  Health  Organization; 2020.
3.  Delorme TL. Restoration of muscle power by heavy-resistance exercises. J Bone Joint Surg . 1945;27(4):645-67.
4.  Shailendra P, Baldock KL, Li LSK, et al. Weight training and risk of all-cause, cardiovascular disease and cancer mortality among older adults. Int J Epidemiol . 2024;53(3):dyae074.
5.  Paluch  AE,  Boyer  WR,  Franklin  BA,  et  al;  on  behalf  the American  Heart  Association  Council  on  Lifestyle  and  Cardiometabolic  Health;  Council  on  Arteriosclerosis,  Thrombosis and Vascular Biology; Council on Clinical Cardiology; Council  on  Cardiovascular  and  Stroke  Nursing;  Council  on Epidemiology and Prevention; and Council on Peripheral Vascular Disease. Resistance exercise training in individuals with and without cardiovascular disease: 2023 update: a scientific statement from the American Heart Association. Circulation . 2024;149(3):e217-31.
6.  Momma  H,  Kawakami  R,  Honda  T,  Sawada  SS.  Musclestrengthening  activities  are  associated  with  lower  risk  and mortality  in  major  non-communicable  diseases:  a  systematic review and meta-analysis of cohort studies. Br J Sports Med . 2022;56(13):755-63.
7.  Carneiro  L,  Afonso  J,  Ramirez-Campillo  R,  Murawska-Ciałowciz E,  Marques  A,  Clemente  FM.  The  effects  of  exclusively  resistance  training-based  supervised  programs  in  people  with depression:  a  systematic  review  and  meta-analysis  of  randomized  controlled  trials. Int  J  Environ  Res  Public  Health . 2020;17(18):6715.
8.  Gordon  BR,  McDowell  CP,  Hallgren  M,  Meyer  JD,  Lyons M, Herring MP. Association of efficacy of resistance exercise training  with  depressive  symptoms:  meta-analysis  and  metaregression analysis of randomized clinical trials. JAMA Psychiatry . 2018;75(6):566-76.
9.  Kovacevic A, Mavros Y, Heisz JJ, Fiatarone Singh MA. The effect  of  resistance  exercise  on  sleep:  a  systematic  review  of randomized controlled trials. Sleep Med Rev . 2018;39:52-68.

10.  Garber CE, Blissmer B, Deschenes MR, et al; American College of Sports Medicine. Quantity and quality of exercise for developing  and  maintaining  cardiorespiratory,  musculoskeletal,  and  neuromotor  fitness  in  apparently  healthy  adults: guidance  for  prescribing  exercise. Med  Sci  Sports  Exerc . 2011;43(7):1334-59.
11.  American College of Sports Medicine. American College of Sports  Medicine  position  stand.  Progression  models  in  resistance  training  for  healthy  adults. Med  Sci  Sports  Exerc . 2009;41(3):687-708.
12.  Kraemer WJ, Adams K, Cafarelli E, et al; American College of  Sports  Medicine.  American  College  of  Sports  Medicine position  stand.  Progression  models  in  resistance  training  for healthy adults. Med Sci Sports Exerc . 2002;34(2):364-80.
13.  Belbasis L, Bellou V, Ioannidis JPA. Conducting umbrella reviews. BMJ Med . 2022;1(1):e000071.
14.  Pollock  M,  Fernandes  RM,  Becker  LA,  Pieper,  D,  Hartling L.  Chapter  V:  overviews  of  reviews.  In:  Higgins  J,  Chandler J, Cumpston M, Li T, Page MJ, Welch VA, editors. Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of Interventions Version 6.4 (Updated August 2023) : Cochrane Publishing; 2023.
15.  Hartling L, Chisholm A, Thomson D, Dryden DM. A descriptive analysis of overviews of reviews published between 2000 and 2011. PLoS One . 2012;7(11):e49667.
16.  Gates  M,  Gates  A,  Pieper  D,  et  al.  Reporting  guideline  for overviews of reviews of healthcare interventions: development of the PRIOR statement. BMJ . 2022;378:e070849.
17.  Currier BS, McLeod JC, Banfield L, et al. Resistance training prescription  for  muscle  strength  and  hypertrophy  in  healthy adults:  a  systematic  review  and  Bayesian  network  metaanalysis. Br J Sports Med . 2023;57(18):1211-20.
18.  Gielen E, Beckwee D, Delaere A, De Breucker S, Vandewoude M, Bautmans I; Sarcopenia Guidelines Development Group of the Belgian Society of Gerontology and Geriatrics (BSGG). Nutritional  interventions  to  improve  muscle  mass,  muscle strength, and physical performance in older people: an umbrella review of systematic reviews and meta-analyses. Nutr Rev . 2021;79(2):121-47.
19.  Shea BJ, Grimshaw JM, Wells GA, et al. Development of AMSTAR: a measurement tool to assess the methodological quality of systematic reviews. BMC Med Res Methodol . 2007;7:10.
20.  Phillips SM, Lau KJ, D'Souza AC, Nunes EA. An umbrella review of systematic reviews of beta-hydroxy-beta-methyl butyrate supplementation in ageing and clinical practice. J Cachexia Sarcopenia Muscle . 2022;13(5):2265-75.
21.  Austin  TM,  Richter  RR,  Sebelski  CA.  Introduction  to  the GRADE approach for guideline development: considerations for physical therapist practice. Phys Ther . 2014;94(11):1652-9.
22.  Sadoyu  S,  Tanni  KA,  Punrum  N,  et  al.  Methodological  approaches  for  assessing  certainty  of  the  evidence  in  umbrella reviews: a scoping review. PLoS One . 2022;17(6):e0269009.
23.  Nunes EA, D'Souza AC, Steen JP, Phillips SM. Lack of evidence for Omega-3 fatty acid supplementation in enhancing lean  mass,  muscle  strength,  and  physical  function  in  healthy adults and clinical populations: an overview of reviews. Clin Nutr ESPEN . 2025;67:155-65.
24.  McLeod JC, Currier BS, Lowisz CV, Phillips SM. The influence  of  resistance  exercise  training  prescription  variables  on skeletal muscle mass, strength, and physical function in healthy adults: an umbrella review. J Sport Health Sci . 2024;13(1):4760.
25.  Lunny C, Pieper D, Thabet P, Kanji S. Managing overlap of primary study results across systematic reviews: practical considerations for authors of overviews of reviews. BMC Med Res Methodol . 2021;21(1):140.
26.  Pieper  D,  Antoine  SL,  Mathes  T,  Neugebauer  EA,  Eikermann  M.  Systematic  review  finds  overlapping  reviews  were
18. not  mentioned  in  every  other  overview. J  Clin  Epidemiol . 2014;67(4):368-75.
27.  Kirvalidze M, Abbadi A, Dahlberg L, Sacco LB, Calderón-Larrañaga  A,  Morin  L.  Estimating  pairwise  overlap in umbrella reviews: considerations for using the corrected covered area (CCA) index methodology. Res Synth Methods . 2023;14(5):764-7.
28.  Bougioukas  KI,  Diakonidis  T,  Mavromanoli  AC,  Haidich AB.  ccaR:  a  package  for  assessing  primary  study  overlap across  systematic  reviews  in  overviews. Res  Synth  Methods . 2023;14(3):443-54.
29.  Amiri N, Fathei M, Mosaferi Ziaaldini M. Effects of resistance training on muscle strength, insulin-like growth factor-1, and  insulin-like  growth  factor-binding  protein-3  in  healthy elderly subjects: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Hormones (Athens) . 2021;20(2):247-57.
30.  Chen YC, Chen W-C, Liu C-W, et al. Is moderate resistance training adequate for older adults with sarcopenia? A systematic review and network meta-analysis of RCTs. Eur Rev Aging Phys Act . 2023;20(1):1-22.
31.  Cordeiro LD, Linhares DG, dos Santos AOB, dos Santos LL, de Castro JBP, Vale RGD. Influence of resistance training on muscle  architecture  in  older  adults:  a  systematic  review  and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Arch Gerontol Geriatr . 2023;112:105020.
32.  Geng Q, Zhai H, Wang L, Wei H, Hou S. The efficacy of different interventions in the treatment of sarcopenia in middle-aged and elderly people: a network meta-analysis. Medicine (Baltimore) . 2023;102(27):e34254.
33.  González-Rocha A, Mendez-Sanchez L, Ortíz-Rodríguez MA, Denova-Gutiérrez E. Effect of exercise on muscle mass, fat mass, bone  mass,  muscular  strength  and  physical  performance  in community dwelling older adults: systematic review and metaanalysis. Aging Dis . 2022;13(5):1421-35.
34.  Kamiya M,  Ihira H, Taniguchi Y, et al. Low-intensity resistance  training  to  improve  knee  extension  strength  in community-dwelling older adults: systematic review and metaanalysis  of  randomized  controlled  studies. Exp  Gerontol . 2023;172:112041.
35.  Wang H, Huang WY, Zhao Y . Efficacy of exercise on muscle function and physical performance in older adults with sarcopenia: an updated systematic review and meta-analysis. Int J Environ Res Public Health . 2022;19(13):8212.
36.  Zeng  D,  Ling  X-Y ,  Fang  Z-L,  Lu  Y-F.  Optimal  exercise  to improve physical ability and performance in older adults with sarcopenia:  a  systematic  review  and  network  meta-analysis. Geriatr Nurs . 2023;52:199-207.
37.  Zhao  H,  Cheng  R,  Song  G,  et  al.  The  effect  of  resistance training  on  the  rehabilitation  of  elderly  patients  with  sarcopenia:  a  meta-analysis. Int  J  Environ  Res  Public  Health . 2022;19(23):15491.
38.  Chen N, He X, Feng Y , Ainsworth BE, Liu Y . Effects of resistance  training  in  healthy  older  people  with  sarcopenia:  a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Eur Rev Aging Phys Act . 2021;18(1):23.
39.  Polito MD, Dias JR Jr, Papst RR. Resistance training to reduce  resting  blood  pressure  and  increase  muscle  strength  in users and non-users of anti-hypertensive medication: a metaanalysis. Clin Exp Hypertens . 2021;43(5):474-85.
40.  Polito MD, Papst RR, Farinatti P. Moderators of strength gains and hypertrophy in resistance training: a systematic review  and  meta-analysis. J  Sports  Sci 2021;39(19):218998.
41.  Andrews KL, Gallagher S, Herring MP. The effects of exercise interventions on health and fitness of firefighters: a meta -analysis. Scand J Med Sci Sports 2019;29(6):780-90.

42.  Beckwee  D,  Delaere  A,  Aelbrecht  S,  et  al.  Exercise  interventions  for  the  prevention  and  treatment  of  sarcopenia.  A systematic umbrella review. J Nutr Health Aging . 2019;23(6):494-502.
43.  Grgic J, Garofolini A, Orazem J, Sabol F, Schoenfeld BJ, Pedisic Z. Effects of resistance training on muscle size and strength in very elderly adults: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled  trials. Sports  Med .  2020;50(11):198399.
44.  Hagstrom AD, Marshall PW, Halaki M, Hackett DA. The effect of resistance training in women on dynamic strength and muscular hypertrophy: a systematic review with meta-analysis. Sports Med . 2020;50(6):1075-93.
45.  Beaudart C, Dawson A, Shaw SC, et al; IOF-ESCEO Sarcopenia Working Group. Nutrition and physical activity in the prevention and treatment of sarcopenia: systematic review. Osteoporos Int . 2017;28(6):1817-33.
46.  Borde R, Hortobagyi T, Granacher U. Dose-response relationships  of  resistance  training  in  healthy  old  adults: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Sports Med . 2015;45(12):1693-720.
47.  De Mello RGB, Dalla Corte RR, Gioscia J, Moriguchi EH. Effects of physical exercise programs on sarcopenia management, dynapenia, and physical performance in the elderly: a systematic review of randomized clinical trials. J  Aging Res . 2019;2019:1959486.
48.  Miranda  JM,  Polito  LFT,  Rica  RL,  et  al.  Muscle  strength training and prescribing in competitive tennis players: a systematic review. Rev Bras Med Esporte . 2020;26(1):87-92.
49.  Guizelini PC, de Aguiar RA, Denadai BS, Caputo F, Greco CC. Effect of resistance training on muscle strength and rate of force development in healthy older adults: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Exp Gerontol . 2018;102:51-8.
50.  Moreira  OC,  Oliveira  CEP,  Maroto-Izquierdo  S,  Cuevas MJ,  De  Paz  JA.  Effects  of  short-term  strength  training  on body  composition,  muscle  strength  and  functional  capacity of  elderly:  a  systematic  review  and  meta-analysis. Biosci  J . 2019;35(6):1941-57.
51.  Arnold P, Bautmans I. The influence of strength training on muscle activation in elderly persons: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Exp Gerontol . 2014;58:58-68.
52.  Asikainen TM, Kukkonen-Harjula K, Miilunpalo S. Exercise for health for early postmenopausal women: a systematic review of randomised controlled trials. Sports Med . 2004;34(11):75378.
53.  Beijersbergen CMI, Granacher U, Vandervoort AA, DeVita P, Hortobagyi T. The biomechanical mechanism of how strength and power training improves walking speed in old adults remains unknown. Ageing Res Rev . 2013;12(2):618-27.
54.  Ferreira ML, Sherrington C, Smith K, et al. Physical activity improves strength, balance and endurance in adults aged 40-65 years: a systematic review. J Physiother . 2012;58(3):145-56.
55.  Munn J, Herbert RD, Evia SC. Contralateral effects of unilateral resistance training: a meta-analysis. J Appl Physiol (1985) . 2004;96(5):1861-6.
56.  Silva  NL,  Oliveira  RB,  Fleck  SJ,  Leon  ACMP,  Farinatti  P . Influence  of  strength  training  variables  on  strength  gains  in adults over 55 years-old: a meta-analysis of dose-response relationships. J Sci Med Sport . 2014;17(3):337-44.
57.  Ramos-Campo DJ, Andreu Caravaca L, Martinez-Rodriguez A,  Rubio-Arias  JA.  Effects  of  resistance  circuit-based  training on body composition, strength and cardiorespiratory fitness: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Biology (Basel) . 2021;10(5):377.
58.  Ramos-Campo DJ, Andreu-Caravaca L, Carrasco-Poyatos M, Benito PJ, Rubio-Arias JA. Effects of circuit resistance training on body composition, strength, and cardiorespiratory fit-
18. ness in middle-aged and older women: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Aging Phys Act . 2021;30(4):725-38.
59.  Munoz-Martinez FA, Rubio-Arias JA, Ramos-Campo DJ, Alcaraz PE. Effectiveness of resistance circuit-based training for maximum oxygen uptake and upper-body one-repetition maximum improvements:  a  systematic  review  and  meta-analysis. Sports Med . 2017;47(12):2553-68.
60.  Colado  JC,  Mena  R,  Calatayud  J,  et  al.  Effects  of  strength training with variable elastic resistance across the lifespan: a systematic review. Cult Cienc Deporte 2020;15(44):147-64.
61.  de Oliveira PA, Blasczyk JC, Souza Junior G, et al. Effects of elastic  resistance  exercise  on  muscle  strength  and  functional performance in healthy adults: a systematic review and metaanalysis. J Phys Act Health . 2017;14(4):317-27.
62.  Tsai YT, Su HH, Chou CH, et al. Impact of elastic band training on functional outcomes and muscle mass in the elderly with sarcopenia: a meta-analysis. Int J Gerontol . 2022;16(3):224-30.
63.  Chaabene H, Prieske O, Herz M, et al. Home-based exercise programmes improve physical fitness of healthy older adults: a PRISMA-compliant systematic review and meta-analysis with relevance for COVID-19. Ageing Res Rev . 2021;67:101265.
64.  Thiebaud RS, Funk MD, Abe T. Home-based resistance training for older adults: a systematic review. Geriatr Gerontol Int . 2014;14(4):750-7.
65.  Baena-Marin  M,  Rojas-Jaramillo  A,  Gonzalez-Santamaria J, et al. Velocity-based resistance training on 1-rm, jump and sprint performance: a systematic review of clinical trials. Sports (Basel) . 2022;10(1):8.
66.  Zhang X, Feng S, Peng R, Li H. The role of velocity-based training  (VBT)  in  enhancing  athletic  performance  in  trained individuals: a meta-analysis of controlled trials. Int J Environ Res Public Health . 2022;19(15):9252.
67.  Nunez  Sanchez  FJ,  Saez  de  Villarreal  E.  Does  flywheel  paradigm  training  improve  muscle  volume  and  force?  A  metaanalysis. J Strength Cond Res . 2017;31(11):3177-86.
68.  Medeiros  DM,  Marchiori  C,  Baroni  BM.  Effect  of  Nordic hamstring exercise training on knee flexors eccentric strength and fascicle  length:  a  systematic  review  and  meta-analysis. J Sport Rehabil . 2020;30(3):482-91.
69.  Morris SJ, Oliver JL, Pedley JS, Haff GG, Lloyd RS. Comparison of weightlifting, traditional resistance training and plyometrics on strength, power and speed: a systematic review with meta-analysis. Sports Med . 2022;52(7):1533-54.
70.  Behm DG, Muehlbauer T, Kibele A, Granacher U. Effects of strength  training  using  unstable  surfaces  on  strength,  power and balance performance across the lifespan: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Sports Med . 2015;45(12):1645-69.
71.  Androulakis-Korakakis P,  Fisher  JP,  Steele  J.  The  minimum effective  training  dose  required  to  increase  1RM  strength  in resistance-trained men: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Sports Med . 2020;50(4):751-65.
72.  Cuthbert M, Haff GG, Arent SM, et al. Effects of variations in  resistance  training  frequency  on  strength  development  in well-trained populations and implications for in-season athlete training:  a  systematic  review  and  meta-analysis. Sports Med . 2021;51(9):1967-82.
73.  Kessinger TK, Melton B, Miyashita T, Ryan G. The effectiveness of frequency-based resistance training protocols on muscular performance and hypertrophy in trained males: a critically appraised topic. J Sport Rehabil . 2020;29(7):1024-31.
74.  Kneffel Z, Murlasits Z, Reed J, Krieger J. A meta-regression of  the  effects  of  resistance  training  frequency  on  muscular strength  and  hypertrophy  in  adults  over  60  years  of  age. J Sports Sci . 2021;39(3):351-8.
75.  Ralston GW, Kilgore L, Wyatt FB, Buchan D, Baker JS. Weekly training frequency effects on strength gain: a meta-analysis. Sports Med Open . 2018;4(1):36.

76. Grgic J, Schoenfeld BJ, Davies TB, Lazinica B, Krieger JW , Pedisic Z. Effect of resistance training frequency on gains in muscular strength: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Sports Med . 2018;48(5):1207-20.
77. Bandeira-Guimaraes M, Blanco-Rambo E, Vieira AF, et al. Chronic effects of different intensities of power training on neuromuscular parameters in older people: a systematic review with meta-analysis. Sports Med Open . 2023;9(1):98.
78. Carvalho L, Junior RM, Barreira J, Schoenfeld BJ, Orazem J, Barroso R. Muscle hypertrophy and strength gains after resistance training with different volume-matched loads: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Appl Physiol Nutr Metab . 2022;47(4):357-68.
79. Csapo  R,  Alegre  LM.  Effects  of  resistance  training  with moderate vs heavy loads on muscle mass and strength in the elderly: a meta-analysis. Scand J Med Sci Sports . 2016;26(9):995-1006.
80. Lopez P, Radaelli R, Taaffe DR, et al. Resistance training load  effects  on  muscle  hypertrophy  and  strength  gain:  systematic  review  and  network  meta-analysis. Med Sci Sports Exerc . 2021;53(6):1206-16.
81. Refalo MC, Hamilton DL, Paval DR, Gallagher IJ, Feros SA, Fyfe JJ. Influence of resistance training load on measures of skeletal  muscle  hypertrophy  and  improvements  in  maximal strength and neuromuscular task performance: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Sports Sci . 2021;39(15):1723-45.
82. Steib S, Schoene D, Pfeifer K. Dose-response relationship of resistance training in older adults: a meta-analysis. Med Sci Sports Exerc . 2010;42(5):902-14.
83. Schoenfeld  BJ,  Grgic  J,  Ogborn  D,  Krieger  JW .  Strength and hypertrophy adaptations between low- vs. high-load resistance  training:  a  systematic  review  and  meta-analysis. J Strength Cond Res . 2017;31(12):3508-23.
84. Schoenfeld BJ, Wilson JM, Lowery RP, Krieger JW . Muscular adaptations in low- versus high-load resistance training: a meta-analysis. Eur J Sport Sci . 2016;16(1):1-10.
85. Maroto-Izquierdo  S,  Garcia-Lopez  D,  Fernandez-Gonzalo R,  Moreira  OC,  González-Gallego  J,  de  Paz  JA.  Skeletal muscle functional and structural adaptations after eccentric overload flywheel resistance training: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Sci Med Sport . 2017;20(10):943-51.
86. Oranchuk DJ, Storey AG, Nelson AR, Cronin JB. Isometric training and long-term adaptations: effects of muscle length, intensity,  and  intent:  a  systematic  review. Scand J Med Sci Sports . 2019;29(4):484-503.
87. Pallares  JG,  Hernández-Belmonte  A,  Martínez-Cava  A, Vetrovsky  T,  Steffl  M,  Courel-Ibáñez  J.  Effects  of  range of  motion  on  resistance  training  adaptations:  a  systematic  review  and  meta-analysis. Scand  J  Med  Sci  Sports . 2021;31(10):1866-81.
88. Bagenhammar S, Hansson EE. Repeated sets or  single  set of resistance training-a systematic review. Adv Physiother . 2007;9(4):154-60.
89. Ralston G, Kilgore L, Wyatt F, Baker J. The effect of weekly set volume on strength gain: a meta-analysis. Sports Med . 2017;47(12):2585-601.
90. Ralston GW, Kilgore L, Wyatt FB, et al. Re-examination of 1- vs. 3-sets of resistance exercise for pre-spaceflight muscle conditioning:  a  systematic  review  and  meta-analysis. Front Physiol . 2019;10:864.
91.  Rocha JNS, Pereira-Monteiro MR, Vasconcelos ABS, Pantoja-Cardoso A, Aragao-Santos JC, Da Silva-Grigoletto ME. Different resistance training volumes on strength, functional fitness, and body composition of older people: a systematic  review  with  meta-analysis. Arch  Gerontol  Geriatr . 2023;119:105303.
92. Wolfe  BL,  LeMura  LM,  Cole  PJ.  Quantitative  analysis  of single-  vs.  multiple-set  programs  in  resistance  training. J Strength Cond Res . 2004;18(1):35-47.
93. Krieger JW . Single versus multiple sets of resistance exercise: a  meta-regression. J  Strength  Cond  Res .  2009;23(6):1890901.
94. Eddens  L,  van  Someren  K,  Howatson  G.  The  role  of  intra-session exercise sequence in the interference effect: a systematic review with meta-analysis. Sports Med . 2018;48(1):177-88.
95. Murlasits  Z,  Kneffel  Z,  Thalib  L.  The  physiological  effects  of  concurrent  strength  and  endurance  training  sequence: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Sports Sci . 2018;36(11):1212-9.
96. Nunes JP, Grgic J, Cunha PM, et al. What influence does resistance exercise order have on muscular strength gains and muscle hypertrophy? A systematic review and meta-analysis. Eur J Sport Sci . 2021;21(2):149-57.
97. Davies T,  Orr  R,  Halaki  M,  Hackett  D.  Effect  of  training leading to repetition failure on muscular strength: a systematic  review  and meta-analysis. Sports Med .  2016;46(4):487502.
98. Grgic J, Schoenfeld BJ, Orazem J, Sabol F. Effects of resistance training performed to repetition failure or non-failure on muscular strength and hypertrophy: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Sport Health Sci . 2022;11(2):202-11.
99. Vieira AF, Umpierre D, Teodoro JL, et al. Effects of resistance training performed to failure or not to failure on muscle strength, hypertrophy, and power output: a systematic review with meta-analysis. J Strength Cond Res . 2021;35(4):1165-75.
100.  Haugen ME, Vårvik FT, Larsen S, Haugen AS, van den Tillaar R, Bjørnsen T. Effect of free-weight vs. machine-based strength  training  on  maximal  strength,  hypertrophy  and jump performance-a systematic review and meta-analysis. BMC Sports Sci Med Rehabil . 2023;15(1):1-20.
101.  Davies TB, Kuang K, Orr R, Halaki M, Hackett D. Effect of movement velocity during resistance training on dynamic muscular strength: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Sports Med . 2017;47(8):1603-17.
102. Grgic J, Lazinica B, Garofolini A, Schoenfeld BJ, Saner NJ, Mikulic P. The effects of time of day-specific resistance training on adaptations in skeletal muscle hypertrophy and muscle strength: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Chronobiol Int . 2019;36(4):449-60.
103. Grgic J, Schoenfeld BJ, Skrepnik M, Davies TB, Mikulic P. Effects of rest interval duration in resistance training on measures of muscular strength: a systematic review. Sports Med . 2018;48(1):137-51.
104. Roig M, O'Brien K, Kirk G, et al. The effects of eccentric versus concentric resistance training on muscle strength and mass in healthy adults: a systematic review with meta-analysis. Br J Sports Med . 2009;43(8):556-68.
105. Balachandran AT, Steele J, Angielczyk D, et al. Comparison of  power training vs traditional  strength  training  on  physical  function in older adults a systematic review and metaanalysis. JAMA Netw Open . 2022;5(5):e2211623.
106.  Pearson LT, Behm DG, Goodall S, Mason R, Stuart S, Barry G.  Effects  of  maximal-versus  submaximal-intent  resistance training on functional capacity and strength in communitydwelling older adults: a systematic review and metaanalysis. BMC Sports Sci Med Rehabil . 2022;14(1):129.
107. Davies  TB,  Tran  DL,  Hogan  CM,  Haff  GG,  Latella  C. Chronic  effects  of  altering  resistance  training  set  configurations  using  cluster  sets:  a  systematic  review  and  metaanalysis. Sports Med . 2021;51(4):707-36.
108.  Jukic I, Van Hooren B, Ramos AG, Helms ER, McGuigan MR, Tufano JJ. The effects of set structure manipulation on

- chronic  adaptations  to  resistance  training:  a  systematic  review and meta-analysis. Sports Med . 2021;51(5):1061-86.
109. Marshall J, Bishop C, Turner A, Haff GG. Optimal training sequences to develop lower body force, velocity, power, and jump height: a systematic review with meta-analysis. Sports Med . 2021;51(6):1245-71.
110. Centner C, Wiegel P, Gollhofer A, Konig D. Effects of blood flow  restriction  training  on  muscular  strength  and  hypertrophy  in  older  individuals:  a  systematic  review  and  metaanalysis. Sports Med . 2018;49(1):95-108.
111.  Lixandrão ME, Ugrinowitsch C, Berton R, et al. Magnitude of muscle strength and mass adaptations between high-load resistance training versus low-load resistance training associated  with  blood-flow  restriction:  a  systematic  review  and meta-analysis. Sports Med . 2018;48(2):361-78.
112.  Rodrigo-Mallorca D, Loaiza-Betancur AF, Monteagudo P, Blasco-Lafarga  C,  Chulvi-Medrano  I.  Resistance  training with blood flow restriction compared to traditional resistance training  on  strength  and  muscle  mass  in  non-active  older adults: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Int J Environ Res Public Health . 2021;18(21):11441.
113.  Hickmott LM, Chilibeck PD, Shaw KA, Butcher SJ. The effect of load and volume autoregulation on muscular strength and  hypertrophy:  a  systematic  review  and  meta-analysis. Sports Med Open . 2022;8(1):9.
114. Larsen S, Kristiansen E, van den Tillaar R. Effects of subjective and objective autoregulation methods for intensity and volume  on  enhancing  maximal  strength  during  resistancetraining interventions: a systematic review. PeerJ . 2021;9:e10663.
115. Kassiano W, Nunes JP, Costa B, Ribeiro AS, Schoenfeld BJ, Cyrino ES. Does varying resistance exercises promote superior muscle hypertrophy and strength gains? A systematic review. J Strength Cond Res . 2022;36(6):1753-62.
116. Harries SK, Lubans DR, Callister R. Systematic review and meta-analysis of linear and undulating periodized resistance training  programs  on  muscular  strength. J  Strength  Cond Res . 2015;29(4):1113-25.
117. Moesgaard L,  Beck  MM,  Christiansen  L,  Aagaard  P,  LundbyeJensen  J.  Effects  of  periodization  on  strength  and  muscle hypertrophy in volume-equated resistance training programs: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Sports  Med . 2022;52(7):1647-66.
118.  Rhea MR, Alderman BL. A meta-analysis of periodized versus nonperiodized strength and power training programs. Res Q Exerc Sport . 2004;75(4):413-22.
119. Cadore  EL,  Izquierdo  M.  How  to  simultaneously  optimize  muscle  strength,  power,  functional  capacity,  and  cardiovascular  gains  in  the  elderly:  an  update. Age  (Dordr) . 2013;35(6):2329-44.
120. Huiberts  RO,  Wüst  RCI,  van  der  Zwaard  S.  Concurrent strength and endurance training: a  systematic  review  and  metaanalysis on the impact of sex and training status. Sports Med . 2024;54(2):485-503.
121.  Petré H, Hemmingsson E, Rosdahl H, Psilander N. Development  of  maximal  dynamic  strength  during  concurrent resistance and endurance training in untrained, moderately trained, and trained individuals: a systematic review and metaanalysis. Sports Med . 2021;51(5):991-1010.
122.  Sabag A, Najafi A, Michael S, Esgin T, Halaki M, Hackett D.  The  compatibility  of  concurrent  high  intensity  interval training  and  resistance  training  for  muscular  strength  and hypertrophy: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Sports Sci . 2018;36(21):2472-83.
123. Trowell D, Vicenzino B, Saunders N, Fox A, Bonacci J. Effect of  strength  training  on  biomechanical  and  neuromuscular
- variables in distance runners: a systematic review and metaanalysis. Sports Med . 2020;50(1):133-50.
124.  Wilson JM, Marin PJ, Rhea MR, Wilson SMC, Loenneke JP, Anderson JC. Concurrent training: a meta-analysis examining interference of aerobic and resistance exercises. J Strength Cond Res . 2012;26(8):2293-307.
125. Cirer-Sastre R, Beltrán-Garrido JV, Corbi F. Contralateral effects after unilateral strength training: a meta-analysis comparing training loads. J Sports Sci Med . 2017;16(2):180-6.
126.  Manca A, Dragone D, Dvir Z, Deriu F. Cross-education of muscular strength following unilateral resistance training: a meta-analysis. Eur J Appl Physiol . 2017;117(11):2335-54.
127.  Yagiz G, Akaras E, Kubis HP, Owen JA. The effects of resistance  training  on  architecture  and  volume  of  the  upper extremity muscles: a systematic review of randomised controlled trials and meta-analyses. Appl Sci . 2022;12(3):1593.
128.  Raya-Gonzalez J, Martinez Sanchez MA. Training methods and nutritional aspects to increase muscle mass: a systematic review. Arch Med Deporte . 2019;36(6):376-85.
129. Schoenfeld  BJ,  Ogborn  DI,  Vigotsky  AD,  Franchi  MV, Krieger  JW .  Hypertrophic  effects  of  concentric  vs.  eccentric muscle actions: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Strength Cond Res . 2017;31(9):2599-608.
130. Baz-Valle E, Balsalobre-Fernández C, Alix-Fages C, SantosConcejero J. A systematic review of the effects of different resistance  training  volumes  on  muscle  hypertrophy. J  Hum Kinet . 2022;81(1):199-210.
131. Bernardez-Vazquez R, Raya-Gonzalez J, Castillo  D,  Beato M. Resistance training variables for optimization of muscle hypertrophy:  an  umbrella  review. Front  Sports  Act  Living . 2022;4:949021.
132. Krieger JW . Single vs. multiple sets of resistance exercise for muscle hypertrophy: a meta-analysis. J  Strength  Cond  Res . 2010;24(4):1150-9.
133. Schoenfeld  BJ,  Ogborn  D,  Krieger  JW .  Dose-response  relationship  between  weekly  resistance  training  volume  and increases  in  muscle  mass:  a  systematic  review  and  metaanalysis. J Sports Sci . 2017;35(11):1073-82.
134. Schoenfeld BJ, Grgic J, Krieger J. How many times per week should a muscle be trained to maximize muscle hypertrophy? A  systematic  review  and  meta-analysis  of  studies  examining the effects of resistance training frequency. J Sports Sci . 2019;37(11):1286-95.
135. Schoenfeld  BJ,  Ogborn  D,  Krieger  JW .  Effects  of  resistance  training  frequency  on  measures  of  muscle  hypertrophy:  a  systematic  review  and  meta-analysis. Sports  Med . 2016;46(11):1689-97.
136. Grgic J. The effects of low-load vs. high-load resistance training on muscle fiber hypertrophy: a meta-analysis. J Hum Kinet . 2020;74(1):51-8.
137. Refalo  MC,  Helms  ER,  Trexler  ET,  Hamilton  DL,  Fyfe JJ.  Influence  of  resistance  training  proximity-to-failure  on skeletal muscle hypertrophy: a systematic review with metaanalysis. Sports Med . 2023;53(3):649-65.
138.  Fuentes-García  MA,  Malchrowicz-Mosko  E,  CastañedaBabarro  A.  Effects  of  variable  resistance  training  versus conventional  resistance  training  on  muscle  hypertrophy:  a systematic review. Sport Sci Health . 2023;20(1):37-45.
139.  Hackett DA, Davies TB, Orr R, Kuang K, Halaki M. Effect of movement velocity during resistance training on musclespecific  hypertrophy:  a  systematic  review. Eur  J  Sport  Sci . 2018;18(4):473-82.
140. Schoenfeld  BJ,  Ogborn  DI,  Krieger  JW .  Effect  of  repetition  duration  during  resistance  training  on  muscle  hypertrophy: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Sports Med . 2015;45(4):577-85.

141. Grgic J, Lazinica B, Mikulic P, Schoenfeld BJ. Should resistance training programs aimed at muscular hypertrophy be periodized?  A  systematic  review  of  periodized  versus  nonperiodized approaches. Sci Sports . 2018;33(3):e97-e104.
142.  Rosa A, Vazquez G, Grgic J, Balachandran AT, Orazem J, Schoenfeld BJ. Hypertrophic effects of single- versus multijoint  exercise  of  the  limb  muscles:  a  systematic  review  and meta-analysis. Strength Cond J . 2023;45(1):49-57.
143. Grgic J, Lazinica B, Mikulic P, Krieger JW, Schoenfeld BJ. The effects of short versus long inter-set rest intervals in resistance training on measures of muscle hypertrophy: a systematic review. Eur J Sport Sci . 2017;17(8):983-93.
144. Henselmans  M,  Schoenfeld  B.  The  effect  of  inter-set  rest intervals on resistance exercise-induced muscle hypertrophy. Sports Med . 2014;44(12):1635-43.
145. Schoenfeld BJ, Grgic J. Effects of range of motion on muscle development during resistance training interventions: a systematic review. SAGE Open Med . 2020;8:2050312120901559.
146. Sodal LK, Kristiansen E, Larsen S, van den Tillaar R. Effects of drop sets on skeletal muscle hypertrophy: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Sports Med Open . 2023;9(1):66.
147. Alcaraz-Ibanez M, Rodriguez-Perez M. Effects of resistance training  on  performance  in  previously  trained  endurance runners: a systematic review. J Sports Sci . 2018;36(6):613-29.
148.  Straight CR, Lindheimer JB, Brady AO, Dishman RK, Evans  EM.  Effects  of  resistance  training  on  lower-extremity muscle power in middle-aged and older adults: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Sports Med . 2016;46(3):353-64.
149. Soriano  MA,  Jimenez-Reyes  P,  Rhea  MR,  Marin  PJ.  The optimal  load  for  maximal  power  production  during  lowerbody  resistance exercises: a meta-analysis. Sports  Med . 2015;45(8):1191-205.
150.  Soriano MA, Suchomel TJ, Marin PJ. The optimal load for maximal power production during upper-body resistance exercises: a meta-analysis. Sports Med . 2017;47(4):757-68.
151. Berryman  N,  Mujika  I,  Arvisais  D,  Roubeix  M,  Binet  C, Bosquet L. Strength training for middle- and long-distance performance: a meta-analysis. Int J Sports Physiol Perform . 2018;13(1):57-63.
152. Almeida  FJ,  Melo  MH,  Nogueira  R,  Prazeres  J,  Costa  C, Gambassi BB. Do all resistance exercise protocols improve the  functional  parameters  of  the  elderly?  A  review  study. Asian J Sports Med . 2020;11(4):1-7.
153.  Hortobagyi T, Lesinski M, Gabler M, VanSwearingen JM, Malatesta D, Granacher U. Effects of three types of exercise interventions on healthy old adults' gait speed: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Sports Med . 2015;45(12):1627-43.
154. Howe TE, Rochester L, Neil F, Skelton DA, Ballinger C. Exercise for improving balance in older people. Cochrane Database Syst Rev . 2011;2011(11):CD004963.
155.  Van Abbema R, De Greef M, Craje C, Krijnen W, Hobbelen H, Van Der Schans C. What type, or combination of exercise can  improve  preferred  gait  speed  in  older  adults?  A  metaanalysis. BMC Geriatr . 2015;15:72.
156. Martins AD, Fernandes O, Pereira A, et al. The effects of high-speed  resistance  training  on  health  outcomes  in  independent older adults: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Int J Environ Res Public Health . 2022;19(9):5390.
157. da Rosa Orssatto LB, de la Rocha Freitas C, Shield AJ, Silveira Pinto R, Trajano GS. Effects of resistance training concentric velocity on older adults' functional capacity: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomised trials. Exp Gerontol . 2019;127:110731.
158. Thomas E, Battaglia G, Patti A, et al. Physical activity programs for balance and fall prevention in elderly: a systematic review. Medicine (Baltimore) . 2019;98(27):e16218.
159.  Dipietro  L,  Campbell  WW,  Buchner  DM,  et  al;  2018 Physical  Activity  Guidelines  Advisory  Committee.  Physical activity, injurious falls, and physical function in aging: an umbrella review. Med Sci Sports Exerc . 2019;51(6): 1303-13.
160.  Tschopp M, Sattelmayer MK, Hilfiker R. Is power training or conventional resistance training better for function in elderly persons? A meta-analysis. Age Ageing . 2011;40(5):54956.
161. Seitz LB, Reyes A, Tran TT, Saez de Villarreal E, Haff GG. Increases in lower-body strength transfer positively to sprint performance: a systematic review with meta-analysis. Sports Med . 2014;44(12):1693-702.
162.  Raya-Gonzalez J, Prat-Luri A, Lopez-Valenciano A, Sabido R, Hernández-Davó JL. Effects of flywheel resistance training on sport actions. A systematic review and meta-analysis. J Hum Kinet . 2021;77(1):191-204.
163.  Blazevich AJ, Wilson CJ, Alcaraz PE, Rubio-Arias JA. Effects of resistance training movement pattern and velocity on isometric muscular rate of force development: a systematic review with meta-analysis and meta-regression. Sports Med . 2020;50(5):943-63.
164. Morton RW, Colenso-Semple L, Phillips  SM.  Training  for strength and hypertrophy: an evidence-based approach. Cur Opin Physiol . 2019;10:90-5.
165.  Helms ER, Byrnes RK, Cooke DM, et al. RPE vs. percentage 1RM loading in periodized programs matched for sets and repetitions. Front Physiol . 2018;9:247.
166. Lorenz D, Morrison S. Current concepts in periodization of strength and conditioning for the sports physical therapist. Int J Sports Phys Ther . 2015;10(6):734-47.
167.  Stone MH, Hornsby WG, Haff GG, et al. Periodization and block  periodization  in  sports:  emphasis  on  strength-power training-a provocative and challenging narrative. J Strength Cond Res . 2021;35(8):2351-71.
168.  Cunanan AJ, DeWeese BH, Wagle JP, et al. The general adaptation syndrome: a foundation for the concept of periodization. Sports Med . 2018;48(4):787-97.
169. Hyde  ET,  Whitfield  GP,  Omura  JD,  Fulton  JE,  Carlson SA.  Trends  in  meeting  the  physical  activity  guidelines: muscle-strengthening alone and combined with aerobic  activity,  United  States,  1998-2018. J  Phys  Act  Health . 2021;18(S1):S37-44.
170.  Calatayud J, Lopez-Bueno R, Nunez-Cortes R, Yang L, Del Pozo Cruz B, Andersen LL. Trends in adherence to the musclestrengthening  activity  guidelines  in  the  US  over  a  20-year span. Gen Hosp Psychiatry . 2023;84:89-95.
171. Abildso  CG,  Daily  SM,  Renee  Umstattd  Meyer  MR,  Perry  CK,  Eyler  A.  Prevalence  of  meeting  aerobic,  musclestrengthening,  and  combined  physical  activity  guidelines during leisure time among adults, by rural-urban classification and region-United States. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep . 2023;72(4):85-9.
172. Bennie  JA,  Lee  DC,  Khan  A,  et  al.  Muscle-strengthening exercise  among  397,423  U.S.  adults:  prevalence,  correlates, and  associations  with  health  conditions. Am  J  Prev  Med . 2018;55(6):864-74.
173. Centers  for  Disease  Control  and  Prevention.  QuickStats: percentage  of  adults  aged  ≥18  years  who  met  the  federal  guidelines  for  muscle-strengthening  physical  activity,† by age group and sex-National Health Interview Survey, United  States,  2020. MMWR  Morb  Mortal  Wkly  Rep . 2022;71(18):642.
174.  Gluchowski A, Bilsborough H, McDermott J, Hawley-Hague H, Todd C. 'A lot of people just go for walks, and don't do anything else': older adults in the UK are not aware of the strength component embedded in the chief medical officers'

- physical activity guidelines-a qualitative study. Int J Environ Res Public Health . 2022;19(16):10002.
175.  Hyde ET, Brown DR, Webber BJ, et al. Meeting the aerobic and muscle-strengthening physical activity guidelines among older  US  adults,  National  Health  Interview  Survey  19982018. J Appl Gerontol . 2024;43(8):1003-14.
176. Carpinelli RN. Challenging the American College of Sports Medicine  2009  position  stand  on  resistance  training. Med Sport . 2009;13(2):131-7.
177.  Fyfe JJ, Hamilton DL, Daly RM. Minimal-dose resistance training for improving muscle mass, strength, and function: a narrative review of current evidence and practical considerations. Sports Med . 2022;52(3):463-79.
178. Cureton  KJ,  Collins  MA,  Hill  DW ,  McElhannon  FM  Jr. Muscle hypertrophy in men and women. Med Sci Sports Exerc . 1988;20(4):338-44.
179. Hickson RC, Hidaka K, Foster C. Skeletal muscle fiber type, resistance  training,  and  strength-related  performance. Med Sci Sports Exerc . 1994;26(5):593-8.
180.  Candow  DG,  Burke  DG.  Effect  of short-term equalvolume resistance training with different workout frequency on muscle mass and strength in untrained men and women. J Strength Cond Res . 2007;21(1):204-7.
181.  Faigenbaum AD, Kamis D, Rial Rebullido T. A strong approach for overcoming the FoRE: fear of resistance exercise. ACSM'S Health Fit J . 2024;28(3):14-20.
182. Niemeijer A, Lund H, Stafne SN, et al. Adverse events of exercise therapy in randomised controlled trials: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Br J Sports Med . 2020;54(18):1073-80.
183. Hollings M, Mavros Y , Freeston J, Fiatarone Singh M. The effect of progressive resistance training on aerobic fitness and strength  in  adults  with  coronary  heart  disease:  a  systematic review and meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials. Eur J Prev Cardiol . 2017;24(12):1242-59.
184.  Swinton  PA,  Schoenfeld  BJ,  Murphy  A.  Dose-response modelling  of  resistance  exercise  across  outcome  domains in  strength  and  conditioning:  a  meta-analysis. Sports  Med . 2024;54(6):1579-94.
185.  Landers J.  Maximum based on reps. J  Strength  Cond  Res . 1984;6(6):60-1.
186.  Nuzzo JL, Pinto MD, Nosaka K, Steele J. Maximal number of repetitions at percentages of the one repetition maximum: a meta-regression and moderator analysis of sex, age, training status, and exercise. Sports Med . 2024;54(2):303-21.
187. Pelland JC, Remmert JF, Robinson ZP, Hinson S, and  Zourdous  MC.  The  resistance  training  dose-response: meta-regressions exploring the effects of weekly volume and frequency on muslce hypertrophy and strength gains. Sports Med. 2025. doi: 10.1007/s40279-025-02344-w. Online ahead of print.
188.  Refalo MC, Helms ER, Robinson ZP, Hamilton DL, Fyfe JJ. Similar muscle hypertrophy following eight weeks of resistance  training  to  momentary  muscular  failure  or  with repetitions-in-reserve in resistance-trained individuals. J Sports Sci . 2024;42(1):85-101.
189. Helms ER, Cronin J, Storey A, Zourdos MC. Application of the  repetitions  in  reserve-based  rating  of  perceived  exertion scale for resistance training. Strength Cond J . 2016;38(4):42-9.
190. Robinson  ZP,  Pelland  JC,  Remmert  JF,  et  al.  Exploring the dose-response  relationship between  estimated resistance training proximity to failure, strength gain, and muscle  hypertrophy:  a  series  of  meta-regressions. Sports  Med . 2024;54(9):2209-31.
191.  Rhodes  RE,  Lubans  DR,  Karunamuni  N,  Kennedy  S, Plotnikoff  R.  Factors  associated  with  participation  in  resistance  training:  a  systematic  review. Br  J  Sports  Med . 2017;51(20):1466-72.
192.  Room J, Hannink E, Dawes H, Barker K. What interventions are used to improve exercise adherence in older people and what behavioural techniques are they based on? A systematic review. BMJ Open . 2017;7(12):e019221.
193. Gutierrez-Arias  R,  Pieper  D,  Lunny  C,  Torres-Castro  R, Aguilera-Eguia R, Seron P. Strategies used to manage overlap of primary study data by exercise-related overviews: protocol  for  a  systematic  methodological  review. BMJ  Open . 2023;13(4):e069906.
194. Martínez-Calderon  J.  Overviews  of  systematic  reviews  in sports and exercise medicine: what are they and why are they important? Br J Sports Med . 2023;57(16):1005-6.
195. Nuzzo  JL,  Pinto  MD,  Kirk  BJC,  Nosaka  K.  Resistance exercise minimal dose strategies for increasing muscle strength in the general population: an overview. Sports Med . 2024;54(5):1139-62.
196. Schoenfeld BJ, Grgic J, Van Every DW, Plotkin DL. Loading recommendations for muscle strength, hypertrophy, and local endurance: a re-examination of the repetition continuum. Sports (Basel) . 2021;9(2):32.
197. Halperin I,  Malleron  T,  Har-Nir  I,  et  al.  Accuracy  in  predicting  repetitions  to  task  failure  in  resistance  exercise:  a scoping review and exploratory meta-analysis. Sports Med . 2022;52(2):377-90.
198. Lopez P, Izquierdo M, Radaelli R, et al. Effectiveness of multimodal training on functional capacity in frail older people: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. J Aging Phys Act . 2018;26(3):407-18.
199.  Makaruk H, Starzak M, Plaszewski M, Winchester JB. Internal  validity  in  resistance  training  research:  a  systematic review. J Sports Sci Med . 2022;21(2):308-31.
200.  Memon AR, Owen PJ, Anderson N, Verhagen E, Mundell NL, Belavy DL. Common issues of systematic reviews in the sports  and  exercise  medicine  field. BMJ Open Sport Exerc Med . 2024;10(1):e001784.
201. Paras T, Sabzevari S, Solomon D, Smith C, McDonough C, Lin A. Trends in level of evidence of systematic reviews in sports medicine, 2010-2020: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Orthop J Sports Med . 2022;10(9):23259671221121330.
202.  Slade  SC,  Dionne  CE,  Underwood  M,  Buchbinder  R. Consensus  on  exercise reporting  template  (CERT):  explanation  and  elaboration  statement. Br  J  Sports  Med . 2016;50(23):1428-37.
203. Ardern CL, Buttner F, Andrade R, et al. Implementing the 27 PRISMA 2020 Statement items for systematic reviews in the sport  and  exercise  medicine,  musculoskeletal  rehabilitation and sports science fields: the PERSiST (implementing Prisma in Exercise, Rehabilitation, Sport medicine and SporTs science) guidance. Br J Sports Med . 2022;56(4):175-95.