## Minireview

Hana R. Bajes*, Nancy M. Hakooz, Khaled T. Dardeer and Emad A. S. Al-Dujaili

## The effect of endurance, resistance training, and supplements on mitochondria and bioenergetics of muscle cells

https://doi.org/10.1515/jbcpp-2021-0261 Received September 9, 2021; accepted October 1, 2021; published online October 25, 2021

Abstract: Bioenergetics is the study of energy flow between biological systems and the surroundings and is measured quantitatively. Energy flow can be affected by many variables, including lifestyle and exercise, where exercise comes in different types; endurance and resistance training play significant roles in enhancing bioenergetics and promoting health. In addition, a supplementary diet supports recovery and energy production. This review aims to study the effect of endurance training, resistance training, and supplement intake on the muscle cell ' s bioenergetics. As a conclusion of the information presented in this mini-review, it was found that resistance, endurance training, and supplements can increase mitochondrial biogenesis, fat oxidation, myofibril synthesis, and increase VO2 max.

Keywords: cell bioenergetics; endurance training; mitochondria; resistance training; supplements.

## Introduction

Nutritional behaviors and physical activity are considered to be essential components of a healthy lifestyle and wellbeing. Whether the action is mild or exhaustive, it involves

*Corresponding author: Hana R. Bajes, Department of Science, Atlantic Cape Community College, Mays Landing, NJ, USA; and Department of Biological Sciences, Faculty of Science, The University of Jordan, Amman, Jordan, E-mail: hbajes@atlantic.edu. https://orcid.org/0000-0003-4691-5030

Nancy M. Hakooz, Department of Biopharmaceutics and Clinical Pharmacy, School of Pharmacy, The University of Jordan, Amman, Jordan

KhaledT. Dardeer, MBCChFacultyofMedicine,CairoUniversity,Cairo, Egypt

Emad A. S. Al-Dujaili, Centre for Cardiovascular Science, Queen ' s Medical Research Institute, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, Scotland muscle contractions and an increase in free radicals and by-products [1]. Moderate to regular exercise levels help prevent cardiovascular diseases, metabolic syndrome, type II diabetes, and neurodegenerative diseases like Alzheimer ' s disease and Parkinson ' s. Moreover, these levels maintain body fi tness, body health, and overall enhancement of well-being. Assurance against stressors and adjustment reactions might be generated with direct regular workout, which plays an essential role in anticipation of continual and degenerative infectious diseases [2].

Numerous studies have demonstrated exercise training ' s ability to induce positive adaptations in skeletal muscles in adults of all ages [1, 3, 4]. This incorporates the expansion of each muscle quality, protein blend, and muscle mass, in addition to changes in myosin heavychain composition, increment mitochondria biogenesis, forti fi cation of myocellular signaling for mitochondrial biogenesis, and an expanded extent of obsequious cells that are precursors to skeletal muscle cells [2, 5].

Regular muscle activity maintains a delicate balance between reactive oxygen species (ROS) and nitric oxides that keep a healthy cardiovascular system [6]. The consumption of nutritional and functional food containing antioxidants would be combined with exercise and a healthy lifestyle. Antioxidants-rich diet and substances that remove free radicals by neutralizing them would be essential to enhance performance during exercise [2].

Exercise or physical activity such as interval training or regular exercise, for example, moderate aerobic activity, running, walking, and swimming helps prevent and ameliorate several health problems including body mass index, blood lipids profile, hypertension, diabetes type 2, cancer, metabolic syndrome, heart attacks, stroke, depression, anxiety, and other mental illness [7 -13]. It also has been found to improve social and sexual activities and moods, boost energy, and promote better sleep [14, 15]. The USA guidelines for Americans are to do at least 150 min a week of moderate activity or 75 min a week of vigorous aerobic activity spread, if possible, throughout the week for better results [16].

Endurance, resistance training, and admissions of supplements are connected to bioenergetics of the muscle cell; bioenergetics is a branch of organic chemistry characterized by the term representing the biochemical or metabolic pathways by which the cell eventually becomes vital.

Bioenergetics is the study of how energy flows through living organisms. The quantitative study of energy transduction in the living cells and nature and the chemical process underlying these transductions [4].

This mini-review aims to study the effect of supplements, endurance, and resistance exercises on mitochondria and bioenergetics of the muscle cells, which enhances health and performance.

## Methods

This mini-review audit arrangement has taken a few steps : Distinguishing proof of investigating how supplements, endurance, and resistance training on mitochondria and bioenergetics of the muscle cells upgrade work out an execution. Writing an overview of pertinent and quali fi ed thoughts was chosen based on the inclusion and exclusion criteria and then organizing the research according to primaryparts; endurance training, resistance training, and supplements.

Inclusion criteria were as follows, studies with an adult healthy population, animal studies, and in vitro studies done on mitochondria. Exclusion criteria included the disabled population, people with severe chronic diseases, and smokers. Information was extracted by twoindependent researchers. Pubmed, Clarivate ' s web of science, and Google scholar were utilized in the search process.

## Endurance training

Endurance is the ability to exert high physical effort for an extended time period. Running a marathon is a good example; it ' s a test of endurance instead of a short sprint. Generally, endurance is concerned about training in the aerobic system compared to the anaerobic system. It considers the number of repetitions a participant can complete in one exercise without having to rest. It also includes strength training exercises like pushups, sit-ups, or weight lifting (American Heart Association, 2018).

Endurance training can alternatively be defined as the recurrence of continuous or intermittent exercise that induces morphological and metabolic changes at the cellular and systemic levels. These changes include an increase in maximal oxygen uptake (VO2max), mitochondrial protein content, and enzymatic activity, resulting in an increase in burning fat for energy, decreased glycolytic fl ux, and increased lactic acid accumulation [17].

Several studies have shown that endurance training enhances muscle mitochondrial proteins synthesis and augment their activity in rat skeletal muscles in a few weeks of training. Human skeletal muscles exhibited a similar response to endurance training, while endurance training increased mitochondrial oxidative capacity. Training activates mitochondrial biogenesis responsible for enhancing metabolic muscle status during exercise and improved resistance to fatigue or exhaustion [1, 6, 18, 19].

ROS form mainly from mitochondria, resulting in cell damage or death. High ROS levels can be also involved in essential metabolic processes, including mitochondria biogenesis to maintain muscle equilibrium and adaptation to exercise [20].

An investigation inspected the impact of an eight-week intense exercise on rodent skeletal muscle mitochondria in various temperatures ranging from 25 to 42. The investigation was performed on 24 grown-up male rodents arbitrarily allocated to either an exercise group on the treadmill (n=12) or an inactive control group (n=12). The investigation showed that in skeletal muscles, intense exercise made mitochondrial biogenesis dynamic and limited oxidation. In separated mitochondria, aerobic exercise enhanced the phosphorylation rate and raised the degrees of coenzyme Q . Also, diminishing in mitochondrial uncoupling, including uncoupling protein-interceded proton spill was identi fi ed subsequent to preparing, clarifying the expanded receptive oxygen species creation (in nonphosphorylating mitochondria) and improved oxidative phosphorylation productivity.

At all contemplated temperatures, aerobic exercise fundamentally enhanced H2O2 creation (and coenzyme Q decrease level) in nonphosphorylating mitochondria and diminished H2O2 creation (and coenzyme Q decrease level) in phosphorylating mitochondria [20].

Aerobic exercise amplified the hyperthermia-actuated expansion in oxidative limit. It decreased the hyperthermiaincited decrease in oxidative phosphorylation proficiency and receptive oxygen species development of nonphosphorylating mitochondria by means of proton spill improvement.

Increasing temperature decreased the effectiveness of oxidative phosphorylation, however, the phosphorylation rates and the oxidative capacities of mitochondria in rat skeletal muscles increased after increasing assay temperature. This indicates that the function of skeletal muscle mitochondria is affected by temperature changes.

The study concluded that endurance training induces qualitative and quantitative variations in muscle mitochondria essential for cell signaling pathways and maintaining the homeostasis of muscle energy, especially at high temperatures [20].

Mitochondria are controlled by several physiological systems such as mitophagy; a process that eliminates malfunctioning mitochondria. Components with severe damage or dysfunction are first separated from the healthy mitochondria by fission, confined into an autophagosome, which then fuses with a lysosome containing hydrolases for disposal of the mitochondria. Accumulation of damaged proteins and byproducts specific to the mitochondrial compartment happens in the skeletal muscle of old organisms. This accumulation could be the trigger mechanism for inhibition of mitochondrial biogenesis or induction of mitochondrial degradation [21].

Another study was conducted to investigate that consistent endurance exercise preserves the basal level of the mitophagy process and mitochondrial function during muscle aging. Mitochondrial proteins and messenger ribonucleic acid (mRNA) content were isolated using biopsies obtained from the vastus lateralis of 33 participants. The study participants were divided into four groups according to age and physical activity. Markers for mitophagy, fission, mitogenesis, fusion, and mitochondrial metabolism were assessed using appropriate assays. The study concluded that independently of age, active participants had higher Mitophagy protein (Parkin), mRNA expression of Beclin1, Gabarap, and fission protein Fis1. Both oxidative phosphorylation and fusion proteins levels were also more elevated in the active groups; however, Cox activity was higher only in old active participants compared to the old sedentary group. No significant difference was observed between groups regarding the transcriptional regulation of mitogenesis. The study determined that a physically active lifestyle has the ability to maintain ultimate mitochondrial quality control by increasing fission and mitophagy [21].

## Resistance training

Resistance training, likewise named strength training or weight training, utilizes protection from solid withdrawal to develop the fortitude, anaerobic perseverance, and size of skeletal muscles [22].

Resistance training is based on the rule that muscles of the body will overcome the resistant load when needed to do as such. When you do resistance training repeatedly and reliably, your muscles become more grounded and bigger (American Heart Association, 2018).

High-load resistance training has shown incitement of myofibrillar protein union, and with continuous training; resistance training can amass into hypertrophy of muscles. Notwithstanding, the need for leading resistance training with high loads has been tested by examines showing that low-load Resistance training performed to weariness is identical to high-stack resistance training in animating and muscle development and myofibrillar union.

Curiously, a few investigations additionally recommend that resistance exercise can animate myocellular motioning for biogenesis of mitochondria to a moderately lower level than endurance practice and relying upon preparing force and routine [5].

Some studies suggested that both mitochondrial proteins and myofibrillar protein synthesis rate increase during the early recovery period; 0 -4 h, after a single run of high-load resistance training in healthy participants in the untrained state [23, 24].

An examination was done in 2015 using permeabilized myofibers measured with high goal respirometry noticed expanded maximal coupled breath upheld by electron move from complex 1 and 2 in the inner membrane of the mitochondria. The examination was conducted following 12 weeks of high-load resistance training in youthful, undeveloped individuals, with just an unobtrusive and nonhuge increment in Citrate Synthase action; a marker of oxidative limit. This can propose that the maximal level of ATP creation limit can be improved self-suf fi ciently of changes in the content of mitochondria [25].

A cross-sectional study revealed higher maximal coupled breath and tighter coupling of oxidative phosphorylation; demonstrative of expanded phosphorylation framework effectiveness, in permeabilized myofibers of exceptional resistance training individuals contrasted with undeveloped controls spite of no distinctions in Citrate Synthase movement [26].

In 2017, a study demonstrated expanded congregations of respiratory chain supercomplexes and expanded mitochondrial cristae thickness in light of long intense exercise, encouraging the subjective balance of oxidative limit [27, 28].

Costa et al. found that resistance training played a role in decreasing insulin resistance and improving glucose tolerance in balb/c mice. The study lasted 12 weeks; the animals were fed either chow or high-fat diet and were further randomly divided by strength training group or a sedentary group. They found that the strength group had increased myocyte cross-sectional area and carried more weight in a three repetition test. Strength training increased citrate synthaseactivity by a 2-fold increase in the chow-fed group, while in the high-fat diet group it was able to restore the unfavorable alterations in insulin pathway activation and heats shock protein 72 content. The study also suggested that reducing

4

Table  : Summary of the endurance and resistance exercise studies included in the review.

| Study                   | Population                                                                                                                                                                                                | Intervention                                                                                                                                                                                     | Outcome                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |
|-------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Zoladz et al. [  ]    | Twenty-four four-month-oldmale Wistar rats were divided into treadmill group (n=  ) and control group (n=  )                                                                                          | Endurance training for fi ve days/week for eight weeks for the treadmill group                                                                                                                   | Endurance training enhanced the biogenesis of mitochondria and increased oxidative ca- pacity. The mechanism stated was through increasing the levels of coenzyme Q , H  O  production, and decreasing reactive oxygen species (ROS).                                                                                                                                                         |
| Balan et al. [  ]     | Thirty-four healthy men were recruited and divided according to age and physical activity into four groups.                                                                                               | Incremental cycle ergometer test                                                                                                                                                                 | Exercise increased mitophagy protein PAR- KIN, mRNA expression of Beclin  and Gabarap, fusion and oxidative phosphoryla- tion, and cox activity.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               |
| Wilkinson et al. [  ] | Ten healthy adults with little to no strenuous physical activity for >  months prior to the study were recruited. Participants were non- smokers and didn ' t take any medica- tions prior to the study. | Ten weeks of endurance training in one leg and resistance training in the other.                                                                                                                 | Resistance training stimulated both mito- chondrial and myofi brillar protein synthesis in the untrained leg. However, endurance exercise stimulated only mitochondrial pro- tein synthesis in both legs. Protein phos- phorylation in the Akt - mTOR - p  S  K pathway was stated as the possible mechanism.                                                                                |
| Donges et al. [  ]    | Eight sedentary middle-aged male subjects                                                                                                                                                                 | Endurance exercise is represented by eight sets of eight leg extension repe- titions and  min of cycling, or con- current resistance exercise. Muscle biopsies were obtained while fasted,   | Both types of exercise-induced acute stimu- lation of myofi brillar and mitochondrial fractional synthesis rates, mRNAexpression, and protein signaling. Resistance exercise and endurance both led to increased (PGC  α ) and (PGC  β ) expression.                                                                                                                                          |
| Porter et al. [  ]    | Eleven young healthy volunteers free from any physical impairment were recruited                                                                                                                          | and h post exercise. Two weeks of resistance exercise                                                                                                                                            | Resistance exercise increased coupled mitochondrial respiration, NAD + produc- tion, mitochondrial complexes, and complex I protein abundance. Mitochondrial biogen- esis was unaltered.                                                                                                                                                                                                        |
| Salvadego et al. [  ] | Eleven athletes with hypertrophy of the skeletal muscle due to long-term resis- tance exercise and  controls                                                                                            | Incremental cycle ergometer test and knee extensions                                                                                                                                             | V ̇ o  peak and fractional O  extraction were lower in athletes vs. control. Athletes had higher ADP-stimulated mitochondrial respi- ration and a tighter coupling of mitochon- drial oxidative phosphorylation. The whole body ' s oxidative function was markedly enhanced in athletes.                                                                                                     |
| Greggio et al. [  ]   | Twenty-six sedentary participants                                                                                                                                                                         | Endurance training for  weeks                                                                                                                                                                  | Endurance exercise demonstrated a differ- ential effect on respiratory complexes. The effect was markedly seen on complex I as it was the most upregulated and was found congregated into supercomplexes in muscle mitochondria. Complexes I, III, and IV were reallocated to supercomplexes in the form of I + III  + IV. These supercomplexes indicate anadaptivemechanismforincreasedmuscle |
| Costa et al. [  ]     | Forty-eight male balb/c mice were divided into  chow-fed groups and  high-fat diet groups.                                                                                                            | Twelve weeks of ladder climbing, strength training, or sedentary lifestyle as a control                                                                                                          | Muscular endurance, strength, andsize were increased following strength training. Regarding glucose modulation, ST decreased insulin resistance, improved glucose tolerance, and stimulated the insu- lin pathway in skeletal muscles. Citrate synthase (CS) enzyme activity in skeletal muscle was observed to be increased following ST.                                                      |

Table  : Summary of supplementation studies included in the review.

| Study                       | Population                                                                                                     | Intervention                                                                                                            | Outcome                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |
|-----------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Pham et al. [  ]           | Twenty-two healthy middle-aged male subjects                                                                   | Daily oral supplementation with MitoQ and CoQ for six weeks                                                             | H  O  levels were decreased in muscle mitochondria, however, there was no ef-                                                                                                                                                                                                               |
| Al-Menhali et al. [  ]     | Mouse myoblast C  C  cell line                                                                              | Caffeine stimulation                                                                                                    | fect on systemic levels of oxidative stress Caffeine stimulation stimulated the pro- duction of superoxide dismutase, lipid peroxidation, and accumulation of  -HNE protein adducts. A strong impact on other mitochondrial ef fi ciency parameters was observed.                            |
| Siliprandi et al. [  ]    | Ten moderately trained male subjects                                                                           | L-carnitine supplementation and two sessions of maximal cycle ergometer exercise separated by three days.               | L-carnitine shifted the pyruvate pathway from lactate to acetylcarnitine, resulting in a lower plasma pyruvate level                                                                                                                                                                          |
| Stellingwerff et al. [  ] | Thirty-oneyoungmalesweredividedinto three groups according to beta-alanine dosage                              | Beta-alanine supplementation for eight weeks                                                                            | Beta-alanine supplementation increased muscle carnosine content. However, car- nosine increase is only dependent upon the total amount of beta-alanine taken.                                                                                                                                 |
| Whit fi eld et al. [  ]   | Ten young active male subjects                                                                                 | Seven-day supplementation with beetroot juice and  min of cycling pre- and post-supplementation.                      | Whole-body VO  was decreased. No ef- fects were observed on mitochondrial ef- fi ciency parameters.                                                                                                                                                                                          |
| Morrison et al. [  ]      | Eleven healthy young males                                                                                     | Vitamin C twice a day and E once a day combined with acute exercise for four weeks                                      | No signi fi cant bene fi cial effects of Vit E or C were observed during acute exercise. However, post-exercise, supplementation with vitamin C and E signi fi cantly decreased increased the activity of su- peroxide dismutase in skeletal muscles.                                         |
| Li et al. [  ]            | Cultured L  myotubes                                                                                          | Treatment with polyphenolic gingerol extract                                                                            | Gingerol extract increased GLUT  re- ceptors on the surface of the cells, indi- cating it ' s the possible rule in                                                                                                                                                                           |
| Chen et al. [             | Cultured murine C  C  myocytes & icariin-treated intact mice                                                | Treatment with icariin extract                                                                                          | hyperglycemia and type  diabetes. Icariin induced the expression of irisin/ FNDC  through the AMPK pathway in the myocytes. However, in vivo icariin treat- ment decreased weight gain in mice and increased expression of PGC-  α , FNDC  , and p-AMPK levels in skeletal muscle tissue. |
| Haohao et al. [  ]        | Twenty-four male rats were divided into three groups; chow-fed, high-fat diet, and resveratrol supplement.     | Resveratrol supplement for eight weeks                                                                                  | Resveratrol treatment protected rats against diet-induced insulin resistance, increased mitochondrial antioxidant enzyme activity, and SIRT  and SIRT                                                                                                                                       |
| Ichinose et al. [  ]      | Twelve healthy male subjects were divided into green tea extract supple- ment + exercise or placebo + exercise | Green tea extract supplement and three days/weekexercisefor  weeks                                                    | Green tea extract increased whole-body fat utilizationduringexercisemeasuredby respiratory gas exchange                                                                                                                                                                                       |
| Kestenbaum et al. [  ]     | Seventy-seven people,  participants with chronic kidney disease, and  controls                             | Six-minutes walk test                                                                                                   | Chronic kidney disease affected mito- chondrial parameters. CKD patients had lower leg ATP max and higher resting O  uptake.                                                                                                                                                                 |
| Vilella et al. [  ]       | Twenty-six male Wistar rats                                                                                    | Supplementationofgreenteacatechin extract or its major component, epi- gallocatechin-  -gallate (EGCG) for four weeks. | GTE enhanced oxidative phosphorylation function, cardiomyocyte functions, and intracellular calcium dynamics by decreasing phospholamban expression. This led to improved cellular bioenergetics in the treatment group compared to the                                                       |

epididymal adipocyte size was another possible mechanism of improving insulin resistance (Tables 1 and 2) [29].

## Supplements

Dietary enhancements improve practice and athletic execution and come in different structures, including tablets, containers, fluids, powders, and bars. A considerable lot of these items contain various fixings in fluctuated mixes and sums. Among the normal fixings are cell reinforcements, B-alanine, green tea, creatine, and nitrate (National establishment of Health, 2017).

Carnitine (3-hydroxy-4-N-trimethylaminobutyrate) signifies an amino corrosive subsidiary and a micronutrient that assumes a pivotal part in digestion. Its primary capacity is to ship long-chain unsaturated fats from the cytosol to the mitochondrial lattice, where unsaturated fat oxidation happens. Another setup element of carnitine is saving film respectability, settling coenzyme A (CoASH)/acetyl-CoA proportion in mitochondria, and diminishing lactate production [1]. It has been assessed that the total carnitine content in the humanbodyis approximately 300 mg/kg while about 95% is kept intracellularly in the heart and skeletal muscle and the excess part in the kidney, liver, and plasma, just 0.5% of allout body carnitine is in circling plasma [30, 50].

People gain carnitine fundamentally from the eating regimen, overwhelmingly from creature-based food items like fish, red meat, chicken, and dairy. Endogenous amalgamation is the source of only 25% of carnitine. Two fundamental amino acids are required for Carnitine biosynthesis: l-lysine, which gives the carbon backbone skeletal and l-methionine that gives the N-methyl gathering. The carnitine blend pathway requires nutrient B6, nutrient C, niacin, and diminished iron as cofactors. Among the various tissues, muscle is probably the fundamental objective of carnitine transport. Approximately, 90 -95% of all-out carnitine is packed in muscle, and the muscle carnitine fixation proportion is 50 folds to plasma focus [30].

Because of the accessibility of over-the-counter carnitine, the utilization of carnitine as an enhancement is regularly conflicting among competitors. Moreover, it has been proposed that carnitine animates fat oxidation and saves muscle glycogen [31]. A considerable increase in VO2 max in competitive walkers was demonstrated by the administration of 4 g/day of carnitine, orally, for two weeks [1, 32]. Dragan and colleagues also reported that 1 g of carnitine ingested for six weeks or 2 g carnitine supplementation for

10 days resulted in higher performances in seven junior athletes [6, 33].

A slight improvement in exercise performance was observed in nine untrained subjects orally supplemented with 2 g of carnitine for two weeks [1, 34]. Besides, Siliprandi and colleagues provided evidence that 2 g/day of carnitine given 1 h before exercise improved high-intensity exercise bypreventing lactate accumulation and increasing pyruvate dehydrogenase activity [35].

Individual ' s nutritional choices can improve or impair the response to training. For example, antioxidants such as vitamin E and vitamin C and may impair training adaptations by weakening cellular signaling but seem to have little effect on performance. Beta-alanine and sodium bicarbonate can improve endurance performance and possibly training adaptations during endurance training by allowing an increased training intensity and/or affecting buffering capacity [17].

In a study by Tanaka and colleagues done on C2C12 and G58 cell lines, Vit D was found to be required for myoblast differentiation. Inhibition of vitamin D receptor (VDR) signaling inhibited the myogenic differentiation of the tested cell line. This suggests that Vit D expression plays a role in maintaining muscle volume [36]. A randomized trial conducted by Ceglia et al. on 21 elderly women found that four months of Vit D supplementation increased intramyocellular VDR concentration and muscle fi ber size. The possible mechanism of action of Vit D on muscle cells was investigated by Ryan et al. on primary human skeletal muscle cells (hSkMCs) were treated with Vit D and observations in oxygen consumption and mitochondrial dynamics were made. Vit D-treated cells showed a higher oxygen consumption rate, higher mitochondrial volume, and higher phosphorylated pyruvate dehydrogenase activity. Several effects related to vitamin D receptors were observed on mRNAs encoding proteins involved in muscle contraction, focal adhesion, integrin, JAK/STAT, MAPK, growth factor, and p53 signaling pathways. This suggests an important role of Vit D in regulating mitochondrial functions and dynamics [37, 38].

Beta-alanine is an increasingly popular amino acid supplement for athletes due to its ability to prolong the power during exercise and delay fatigue during highintensity exercise. It elevates muscle carnosine content in a dose-dependent manner [39]. The supplementation of b-alanine may impact mitochondrial biogenesis by increased calcium re-uptake and its downstream effects on AMPK, CaMK, and extracellular-signal-regulated kinases (ERK 1, 2) signaling pathways [40].

Dietary nitrate (NO3 -), found in beetroots, is generally utilized as an enhancement, can possibly enlarge transformations to aerobic exercise because of its capacity to expand plasma levels of nitrite (NO2 -) and nitric oxide (NO) [19, 41]. It was discovered that it could increment mitochondrial biogenesis by means of NO incitement of guanylate cyclase prompting enactment of PGC-1 α , and shifts muscle fi ber type toward a more oxidative sort, through nitric oxide ' s job in calcineurin -NFAT (atomic factor of initiated T cells) fl agging, have additionally been accounted for, which are perhaps identi fi ed with increments in mitochondrial hydrogen peroxide [42].

Nutrients C and E are cancer prevention agent nutrients to shield cell organelles from oxidative harm. No effect on exercise execution results has been seen in human investigations while enhancing with nutrients C as well as E during controlled perseverance training [43].

Polyphenols can act as scavengers and can stimulate stress-related cell-signaling pathways. They have the ability to increase mitochondrial biogenesis by increasing gene expression of the encoding proteins, such as NRF2, as well as by stimulating the SIRT1 -AMPK -PGC1 α pathway in skeletal muscle [44].

Gingerol, icariin, and resveratrol are polyphenols that can target the skeletal muscle tissue to regulate energy metabolism and improve mitochondrial functions. Gingerol increases surface GLUT4 distribution in L6 myotubes, thus enhancing glucose uptake by the cell [45]. Icariin increased PGC-1 α expression in C2C12 myotubes and induces irisin/ FNDC5 expression via the AMPK pathway, indicating that icariin may be promising as an anti-obesity drug [46]. Resveratrol improves insulin sensitivity by improving SIRT3 expressions and rebalance between subsarcolemmal mitochondrial oxidative stress and antioxidant activity in high-fat diet rats [47]. In addition, polyphenols target mitochondrial functional genes such as mfn2, TFAM, and drp1 to improve mitochondrial bioenergetics [48].

Healthy males were involved in 10 weeks of moderateintensity endurance training, supplemented with green tea extract, which resulted in greater fat oxidation while cycling at 55% VO2 peak, while no changes were observed in the placebo [4, 49]. A recent study by Vilella et al. stated that green tea extract improved cardiomyocyte mechanics and intracellular calcium dynamics in male Wistar rats. A fourweek GTE oral administration improved mitochondrial function by increasing the cell respiration rate, increased the ATP content by 25%, and increased the oxidative phosphorylation complexes. They stated the possible mechanism of action is by decreasing the expression of total phospholamban (PLB), which led to an increase of both the sarco- endoplasmic reticulum calcium ATPase/PLB ratios and the phosphorylated-PLB/PLB [50].

## Summary and outlook

Cellular bioenergetics capacity is affected by multiple factors; dietary supplements, endurance, and resistance training. The factors combined or separated affect the cell ' s bioenergetics at different levels; such as VO2 max, oxidative phosphorylation, or the electron transport chain. Further testing and assays are recommended to understand the mechanism by which each factor impacts the process of energy production, either on cell signaling or biosynthesis.

Research funding:

Not applicable.

Competing interests: Authors state no con fl ict of interest. Informed consent: Informed consent was obtained from all individuals included in this study.

Ethical approval: The local Institutional Review Board deemed the study exempt from review.

Authorcontributions: All authors have accepted responsibility for the entire content of this manuscript and approved its submission.

## References

1. Al-Menhali AS, Banu S, Angelova PR, Barcaru A, Horvatovich P, Abramov AY, et al. Lipid peroxidation is involved in calcium dependent upregulation of mitochondrial metabolism in skeletal muscle. Biochim Biophys Acta Gen Subj 2020;1864:129487.
2. Bajes HR, Al-Dujaili EA. Polyphenolic-rich fruits and supplements enhance exercise performance; general review. Jordan J Pharmaceut Sci 2017;10:135 -51.
3. Di Meo S, Iossa S, Venditti P. Improvement of obesity-linked skeletal muscle insulin resistance by strength and endurance training. J Endocrinol 2017;234:R159 -81.
4. Kestenbaum B, Gamboa J, Liu S, Ali AS, Shankland E, Jue T, et al. Impaired skeletal muscle mitochondrial bioenergetics and physical performance in chronic kidney disease. JCI Insight 2020; 5:e133289.
5. Groennebaek T, Vissing K. Impact of resistance training on skeletal muscle mitochondrial biogenesis, content, and function. Front Physiol 2017;8:713.
6. PhamT, MacRae CL, Broome SC, D ' souza RF, Narang R, Wang HW, et al. MitoQ and CoQ10 supplementation mildly suppresses skeletal muscle mitochondrial hydrogen peroxide levels without impacting mitochondrial function in middle-aged men. Eur J Appl Physiol 2020;120:1657 -69.
7. Kim M-K, Tanaka K, Kim M-J, Matsuo T, Ajisaka R. Exercise training-induced changes in heart rate recovery in obese men

8

with metabolic syndrome. Metab Syndr Relat Disord 2009;7: 469 -76.

8. Shiraev T, Barclay G. Evidence based exercise -clinical bene fi ts of high intensity interval training. Aust Fam Physician 2012;41: 960 -2.
9. Moore SC, Lee IM, Weiderpass E, Campbell PT, Sampson JN, Kitahara CM, et al. Association of leisure-time physical activity with risk of 26 types of cancer in 1.44 million adults. JAMA Intern Med 2016;176:816 -25.
10. Wormgoor SG, Dalleck LC, Zinn C, Harris NK. Effects of highintensity interval training on people living with type 2 diabetes: a narrative review. Can J Diabetes 2017;41:536 -47.
11. Mousavi Gilani SR, Khazaei Feizabad A. The effects of aerobic exercise training on mental health and self-esteem of type 2 diabetes mellitus patients. Health Psychol Res 2019; 7:6576.
12. Matthews CE, Moore SC, Arem H, Cook MB, Trabert B, Håkansson N, et al. Amount and intensity of leisure-time physical activity and lower cancer risk. J Clin Oncol 2020;38:686 -97.
13. Gorzi A, Rahmani A, Mohammadi Z, Neto WK. Effects of different lengths of high-intensity interval training microcycles on the systemic and hippocampal in fl ammatory state and antioxidant balance of immature rats. Mol Biol Rep 2021;48:5003 -11.
14. Simon RM, Howard L, Zapata D, Frank J, Freedland SJ, Vidal AC. The association of exercise with both erectile and sexual function in black and white men. J Sex Med 2015;12:1202 -10.
15. Tamminen N, Reinikainen J, Appelqvist-Schmidlechner K, Borodulin K, Mäki-Opas T, Solin P. Associations of physical activity with positive mental health: a population-based study. Ment Health Phys Activ 2020;18:100319.
16. Services UDoHaH. Physical activity guidelines for Americans, 2nd ed. Washington, DC: Services UDoHaH; 2021.
17. Rothschild JA, Bishop DJ. Effects of dietary supplements on adaptations to endurance training. Sports Med 2019;50:25 -53.
18. Huertas JR, Casuso RA, Agustín PH, Cogliati S. Stay fi t, stay young: mitochondria in movement: the role of exercise in the new mitochondrial paradigm. Oxid Med Cell Longev 2019;2019:1 -18.
19. Geto Z, Molla MD, Challa F, Belay Y, Getahun T. Mitochondrial dynamic dysfunction as a main triggering factor for in fl ammation associated chronic non-communicable diseases. J In fl amm Res 2020;13:97.
20. Zoladz JA, Koziel A, Woyda-Ploszczyca A, Celichowski J, Jarmuszkiewicz W. Endurance training increases the ef fi ciency of rat skeletal muscle mitochondria. P fl üeg Arch Eur J Physiol 2016; 468:1709 -24.
21. Balan E, Schwalm C, Naslain D, Nielens H, Francaux M, Deldicque L. Regular endurance exercise promotes fi ssion, mitophagy, and oxidative phosphorylation in human skeletal muscle independently of age. Front Physiol 2019;10:1088.
22. Trewin A, Berry B, Wojtovich A. Exercise and mitochondrial dynamics: keeping in shape with ROS and AMPK. Antioxidants 2018;7:7.
23. Donges CE, Burd NA, Duf fi eld R, Smith GC, West DWD, Short MJ, et al. Concurrent resistance and aerobic exercise stimulates both myofi brillar and mitochondrial protein synthesis in sedentary middle-aged men. J Appl Physiol 2012;112:1992 -2001.
24. Wilkinson SB, Phillips SM, Atherton PJ, Patel R, Yarasheski KE, Tarnopolsky MA, et al. Differential effects of resistance and endurance exercise in the fed state on signalling molecule

phosphorylation and protein synthesis in human muscle. J Physiol 2008;586:3701 -17.

25. Porter C, Reidy PT, Bhattarai N, Sidossis LS, Rasmussen BB. Resistance exercise training alters mitochondrial function in human skeletal muscle. Med Sci Sports Exerc 2015;47:1922 -31.
26. Salvadego D, Domenis R, Lazzer S, Porcelli S, Rittweger J, Rizzo G, et al. Skeletal muscle oxidative function in vivo and ex vivo in athletes with marked hypertrophy from resistance training. J Appl Physiol 2013;114:1527 -35.
27. Nielsen J, Gejl KD, Hey-Mogensen M, Holmberg H-C, Suetta C, Krustrup P, et al. Plasticity in mitochondrial cristae density allows metabolic capacity modulation in human skeletal muscle. J Physiol 2016;595:2839 -47.
28. Greggio C, Jha P, Kulkarni SS, Lagarrigue S, Broskey NT, Boutant M, et al. Enhanced respiratory chain supercomplex formation in response to exercise in human skeletal muscle. Cell Metabol 2017;25:301 -11.
29. Costa JSR, Fonseca GFAC, Ottone NCDS, Silva PA, Antonaccio RF, Silva G, et al. Strength training improves insulin resistance and differently affects mitochondria in skeletal muscle and visceral adipose tissue in high-fat fed mice. Life Sci 2021;278: 119639.
30. Gnoni A, Longo S, Gnoni GV, Giudetti AM. Carnitine in human muscle bioenergetics: can carnitine supplementation improve physical exercise? Molecules 2020;25:182.
31. Pooyandjoo M, Nouhi M, Shab-Bidar S, Djafarian K, Olyaeemanesh A. The effect of (L-)carnitine on weight loss in adults: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Obes Rev 2016;17:970 -6.
32. Marconi C, Sassi G, Carpinelli A, Cerretelli P. Effects o fl -carnitine loading on the aerobic and anaerobic performance of endurance athletes. Eur J Appl Physiol Occup Physiol 1985;54:131 -5.
33. Dr ă gan IG, Vasiliu A, Georgescu E, Eremia N. Studies concerning chronic and acute effects of L-carnitina in elite athletes. Physiologie (Bucarest) 1989;26:111 -29.
34. Greig C, Finch KM, Jones DA, Cooper M, Sargeant AJ, Forte CA. The effect of oral supplementation with l-carnitine on maximum and submaximum exercise capacity. Eur J Appl Physiol Occup Physiol 1987;56:457 -60.
35. Siliprandi N, Di Lisa F, Pieralisi G, Ripari P, Maccari F, Menabo R, et al. Metabolic changes induced by maximal exercise in human subjects following L-carnitine administration. Biochim Biophys Acta Gen Subj 1990;1034:17 -21.
36. Tanaka M, Kishimoto KN, Okuno H, Saito H, Itoi E. Vitamin D receptor gene silencing effects on differentiation of myogenic cell lines. Muscle Nerve 2014;49:700 -8.
37. Ceglia L, Niramitmahapanya S, da Silva Morais M, Rivas DA, Harris SS, Bischoff-Ferrari H, et al. A randomized study on the effect of vitamin D3 supplementation on skeletal muscle morphology and vitamin D receptor concentration in older women. J Clin Endocrinol Metabol 2013;98:E1927 -35.
38. Ryan ZC, Craig TA, Folmes CD, Wang X, Lanza IR, Schaible NS, et al. 1 α ,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 regulates mitochondrial oxygen consumption and dynamics in human skeletal muscle cells. J Biol Chem 2016;291:1514 -28.
39. Stellingwerff T, Anwander H, Egger A, Buehler T, Kreis R, Decombaz J, et al. Effect of two β -alanine dosing protocols on muscle carnosine synthesis and washout. Amino Acids 2011;42: 2461 -72.

40. Turcotte LP, Abbott MJ. Contraction-induced signaling: evidence of convergent cascades in the regulation of muscle fatty acid metabolism. Can J Physiol Pharmacol 2012;90:1419 -33.
41. Lundberg JO, Govoni M. Inorganic nitrate is a possible source for systemic generation of nitric oxide. Free Radic Biol Med 2004;37: 395 -400.
42. Whit fi eld J, Ludzki A, Heigenhauser GJF, Senden JMG, Verdijk LB, van Loon LJC, et al. Beetroot juice supplementation reduces whole body oxygen consumption but does not improve indices of mitochondrial ef fi ciency in human skeletal muscle. J Physiol 2015;594:421 -35.
43. Morrison D, Hughes J, Della Gatta PA, Mason S, Lamon S, Russell AP, et al. Vitamin C and E supplementation prevents some of the cellular adaptations to endurance-training in humans. Free Radic Biol Med 2015;89:852 -62.
44. Somerville V, Bringans C, Braakhuis A. Polyphenols and performance: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Sports Med 2017;47:1589 -99.
45. Li Y, Tran V, Duke C, Roufogalis B. Gingerols of zingiber of fi cinale enhance glucose uptake by increasing cell surface GLUT4 in cultured L6 myotubes. Planta Med 2012;78:1549 -55.
46. Chen S-Q, Ding L-N, Zeng N-X, Liu H-M, Zheng S-H, Xu J-W, et al. Icariin induces irisin/FNDC5 expression in C2C12 cells via the AMPK pathway. Biomed Pharmacother 2019;115:108930.
47. Haohao Z, Guijun Q, Juan Z, Wen K, Lulu C. Resveratrol improves high-fat diet induced insulin resistance by rebalancing subsarcolemmal mitochondrial oxidation and antioxidation. J Physiol Biochem 2015;71:121 -31.
48. Mthembu SXH, Dludla PV, Ziqubu K, Nyambuya TM, Kappo AP, Madoroba E, et al. The potential role of polyphenols in modulating mitochondrial bioenergetics within the skeletal muscle: a systematic review of preclinical models. Molecules 2021;26:2791.
49. Ichinose T, Nomura S, Someya Y, Akimoto S, Tachiyashiki K, Imaizumi K. Effect of endurance training supplemented with green tea extract on substrate metabolism during exercise in humans. Scand J Med Sci Sports 2010;21:598 -605.
50. Vilella R, Sgarbi G, Naponelli V, Savi M, Bocchi L, Liuzzi F, et al. Effects of standardized green tea extract and its main component, EGCG, on mitochondrial function and contractile performance of healthy rat cardiomyocytes. Nutrients 2020;12: 2949.