## The Impact of Resistance Training on Swimming Performance: A Systematic Review

## Emmet Crowley, Andrew J. Harrison &amp; Mark Lyons

## Sports Medicine

ISSN 0112-1642

Sports Med DOI 10.1007/s40279-017-0730-2

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Your article is protected by copyright and all rights are held exclusively by Springer International Publishing Switzerland. This eoffprint is for personal use only and shall not be self-archived in electronic repositories. If you wish to self-archive your article, please use the accepted manuscript version for posting on your own website. You may further deposit the accepted manuscript version in any repository, provided it is only made publicly available 12 months after official publication or later and provided acknowledgement is given to the original source of publication and a link is inserted to the published article on Springer's website. The link must be accompanied by the following text: "The final publication is available at link.springer.com'.

<!-- image -->

1 23

1

## SYSTEMATIC REVIEW

## The Impact of Resistance Training on Swimming Performance: A Systematic Review

Emmet Crowley 1 · Andrew J. Harrison 1 · Mark Lyons 1

<!-- image -->

Ó Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2017

## Abstract

Background The majority of propulsive forces in swimming are produced from the upper body, with strong correlations between upper body strength and sprint performance. There are significant gaps in the literature relating to the impact of resistance training on swimming performance, specifically the transfer to swimming performance.

Objective The aims of this systematic literature review are to (1) explore the transfer of resistance-training modalities to swimming performance, and (2) examine the effects of resistance training on technical aspects of swimming.

Methods Four online databases were searched with the following inclusion criteria: (1) journal articles with outcome measures related to swimming performance, and (2) competitive swimmers participating in a structured resistance-training programme. Exclusion criteria were (1) participants with a mean age \ 16 years; (2) untrained, novice, masters and paraplegic swimmers; (3) triathletes and waterpolo players; (4) swimmers with injuries or illness; and (5) studies of starts and turns specifically. Data

&amp; Emmet Crowley emmet.crowley@ul.ie

Andrew J. Harrison drew.harrison@ul.ie

Mark Lyons mark.lyons@ul.ie

Biomechanics Research Unit, Department of Physical Education and Sport Sciences, University of Limerick, Limerick, Ireland

<!-- image -->

were extracted using the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) guidelines, and the Physiotherapy Evidence Database (PEDro) scale was applied.

Results For optimal transfer, specific, low-volume, highvelocity/force resistance-training programmes are optimal. Stroke length is best achieved through resistance training with low repetitions at a high velocity/force. Resisted swims are the most appropriate training modality for improving stroke rate.

Conclusion Future research is needed with respect to the effects of long-term resistance-training interventions on both technical parameters of swimming and overall swimming performance. The results of such work will be highly informative for the scientific community, coaches and athletes.

## Key Points

The current literature shows that resistance training can improve swimming performance in response to various types of resistance-training programmes.

For optimal transfer, low-volume, highvelocity/force resistance-training programmes are recommended.

Trends identified in the literature suggest that for improving stroke length, low repetitions at high intensities are needed and resisted swims could present a viable training modality for increasing stroke rate.

<!-- image -->

## 1 Introduction

Swimming performance is influenced by a complex interaction of physiological, morphological, neuromuscular, biomechanical and technical factors. More specifically, swimming velocity is a product of stroke rate and stroke length [1], and increasing stroke rate [2] or stroke length [3] independently has been found to improve swimming performance. It has been suggested that improvement in swimming velocity requires programmes including elements of high frequency, duration and intensity, resulting in high overall training volumes [4]. It is not well-established in the existing literature whether resistance training improves stroke rate, stroke length and overall swimming performance.

Resistance training can be defined as the ability of a given muscle or group of muscles to generate muscular force under specific conditions. The benefits of resistance training in swimmers have been previously reviewed [5, 6] and have been questioned by coaches due to concerns about increases in muscle mass (hypertrophy) or decreases in flexibility which could increase drag forces and negatively affect swimming performance. Despite these concerns, resistance-training programmes are commonly implemented by swimmers [7, 8]. Resistance-training modalities are intended to overload the muscles used in swimming and increase maximal power output. The proposed physiological benefits resulting from resistance training are many, but notable benefits include increases in phosphagen stores, contractile proteins, anaerobic power output, muscle architecture, fibre pennation, protein synthesis, tissue remodelling and hypertrophy of fast-twitch muscle fibres [9-12]. Furthermore, resistance training has been found to increase maximum strength and therefore increase the rate of force development [13]. It is widely accepted that swimming performance is highly dependent on power and muscular strength [14-18], with the latter identified as a major determinant of success in competitive swimming [19]. Specifically, upper body strength is imperative in swimming as the majority of propulsive forces [20-22] and swimming velocity [22-25] are generated by the upper body musculature. Previous research [20] has also found strong correlations ( r = 0.93) between upper body strength and swimming performance.

These points aside, there are key gaps in the scientific literature on swimming relating to the effectiveness of resistance-training programmes in improving muscular strength, and, more significantly, the resulting effects on key technical parameters of swimming performance. Furthermore, it is not understood whether or how these effects transfer to improved swimming velocity and performance. Consequently, the aims of this systematic literature review are (1) to explore the transfer of resistance-training modalities to swimming performance in competitive swimmers, and (2) to examine the effects of resistance training on key technical parameters of swimming performance.

<!-- image -->

## 2 Methods

## 2.1 Research Approach

The MEDLINE, PubMed, SPORTDiscus and Web of Science online databases were searched using specific search terms (swimming) AND (strength, resistance, power, crosstraining) AND (humans) NOT (waterpolo, triathlon) for the period from January 1988 up to and including January 2016. Search terms were modified accordingly to fit the requirements or nuances of the databases used.

## 2.2 Study Criteria

Studies were included in this systematic review if they met the following criteria: (1) journal articles with outcome measures related to swimming performance; (2) competitive-, regional-, national- or elite-level swimmers engaged in a structured resistance and swimming training programme; and (3) resistance-training modalities using traditional approaches as well as other novel approaches where resistance is applied to the body. Exclusion criteria were (1) subjects with a mean age \ 16 years; (2) untrained, novice, masters and paraplegic swimmers; (3) triathletes and waterpolo players; (4) swimmers with injuries or illnesses; and (5) studies focusing on starts and turns.

## 2.3 Study Selection

Data were extracted using the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) guidelines [26]. The search process (illustrated in Fig. 1) included a hierarchy of assessment whereby studies were first assessed by journal title (and duplicates removed), second by abstract, and third by full article review, when the journal article was either included or excluded based on the inclusion and exclusion criteria.

## 2.4 The Physiotherapy Evidence Database (PEDro)

The Physiotherapy Evidence Database (PEDro) scale [27] was used to rate the quality of the literature. The PEDro scale consists of 11 items related to scientific rigor, including eligibility criteria, random allocation strategy, concealed allocation, follow-up comparison, baseline Fig. 1 Schematic representation of the data extraction protocol. The PRISMA flowchart was used to illustrate the inclusion and exclusion criteria used in this systematic review. PRISMA Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and MetaAnalyses comparison, blinding of subjects, therapists and assessors, intention to treat, between-group analysis, and both point and variability measures. The scale gives 1 point if the study satisfies the criteria and 0 points if not. Studies scoring 9-10 on the PEDro scale are considered to be methodologically excellent, those scoring 6-8 are considered good, those scoring 4-5 are considered fair, and those scoring \ 4 are considered methodologically poor. The principal investigator scored all studies according to this scale.

<!-- image -->

## 3 Results

From the 14 papers identified (see Fig. 1), 10 examined dryland resistance training and four examined swim-specific resistance-training methods. The dry-land resistance group was divided into three subgroups: (1) biokinetic swim bench [28]; (2) traditional weight training [7, 16, 18, 19, 29-32]; and (3) core training [33]. The swim-specific resistance group included resistive-band training [2], arms-only training [34], drag-suit training [35] and the measurement of active drag (MAD) device system [36].

Table 1 shows the weekly training programme, competition level of swimmers, number of subjects, sex, age and anthropometric characteristics, PEDro scale scores, control and resistance-training sample size, and strength and swimming performance tests. PEDro scores for all studies reviewed ranged from 4 [16, 29, 31] to 7 [2, 33, 34]. Notably, 50% of the studies did not randomly allocate subjects to groups [7, 16, 19, 29, 31, 33, 36]. Other studies [16, 29, 30] did not assign a control group. Table 2 shows the specific resistance-training programmes, and baseline and post-intervention results with respect to the relevant strength tests, stroke length, stroke rate and swimming performance.

The implementation of various resistance-training interventions showed improvements in stroke length, stroke rate and swimming performance. A significant ( p \ 0.05) increase in stroke length and swimming performance was observed within the traditional resistancetraining groups [31, 32], and a significant ( p \ 0.05) increase in stroke rate and swimming performance was also observed within the traditional resistance-training groups [7, 31]. Girold et al. [2] found a significant ( p \ 0.05) increase in stroke rate and 100 m swimming performance,

<!-- image -->

Table 1 Summary of studies, subject background, PEDro scale and tests used to examine the effect of resistance training on swimming performance

| Swim test a                                  | 91.44 m fc swim (mock meet)                             | 50 m fc swim                                           | arm 25 m fc swim 50 m fc swim                                                                                                     | 365.8 m fc swim 50 m fc swim 100 m fc swim                                                                         | 400 m fc swim 50 m fc swim 365.8 m fc swim                                                                                                                         | 22.9 m fc swim 91.44 m fc swim 182.88 m fc swim                                                          |
|----------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Control Strength test a                      | Biokinetic swim- bench test Isokinetic dynamometer      | Isokinetic dynamometer                                 | Isometric barbell extension                                                                                                       | bench Swim power (tethered isokinetic device) Tethered swim Bilateral shoulder extension                           | Isokinetic dynamometer Biokinetic swim                                                                                                                             | swim control Isokinetic dynamometer 1 min ergometer                                                      |
| RT ( N )                                     | 8                                                       | 8                                                      | 10                                                                                                                                | 11                                                                                                                 | 7 (7 in assisted group) 12                                                                                                                                         | 7                                                                                                        |
| PEDro scale                                  | 5                                                       | 6                                                      | 3                                                                                                                                 | 6                                                                                                                  | 6 5                                                                                                                                                                | 4                                                                                                        |
| N, sex Age and anthropometrics (mean ± SD) a | 16, M 19.1 ± 2.1 years; 1.83 ± 0.76 m; 75.67 ± 10.06 kg | 12, M 12, F 21.8 ± 3.9 years; 1.74 ± 0.08 m; 66 ± 9 kg | 17, M 2, F Control group: 17.8 ± 3.9 years; 1.79 ± 0.79 m; 67.6 ± 9.1 kg RT group: 16.6 ± 1.2 years; 1.78 ± 0.72 m; 65.2 ± 9.4 kg | 76.5 ± 2.8 kg 8, M 12, F Control group: 15.9 ± 1.1 years; 1.73 ± 0.06 m; 58.3 ± 6.6 kg RT group: 17.5 ± 2.9 years; | 1.71 ± 0.09 m; 58.9 ± 10.2 kg 10, M Control group: 16.5 ± 1.5 years; 1.71 ± 0.11 m; 62 ± 4 kg group: 16.5 ± 2.5 years; 0.09 m; 64 ± 8 kg group: 19.5 ± 0.26 years; | 1.47 m; 77.05 ± 1.93 kg 7, Control group: NR RT group: 16.49 ± 0.81 years; 1.79 ± 0.51 m; 70.5 ± 4.12 kg |
| Training programme Level                     | swim Collegiate                                         | swim (2 h) National                                    | 6 weeks NR swim/week 4/week RT Competitive                                                                                        | swim RT Competitive                                                                                                | Regional/national 11, F RT 1.71 ± Collegiate 24, M Control                                                                                                         | 1.81 ± National M                                                                                        |
|                                              | swim-bench training al. [28] 10 weeks 6/week 3/week RT  | et al. [32] 4 weeks 10/week                            | [31]                                                                                                                              | 5600 m/day swim 2/week RT et al. [7] 12 weeks C 6/week                                                             | weeks swim 2/week RT Tanaka et al. [16] 8 weeks                                                                                                                    | 9 weeks 13-16.5 km                                                                                       |
| References                                   | Biokinetic Roberts et                                   | Traditional resistance training Girold                 | 3/week RT Strass                                                                                                                  | Pearson [19] Aspenes 2/week                                                                                        | Girold et al. [18] 6 5/week                                                                                                                                        | 3/week RT Manning et al. [30] /day swim                                                                  |

<!-- image -->

Table 1 continued

## Author's personal copy

| Strength test a Swim test a                  | Maximum isometric (lower back, grip arm pulling strength) Swimming competitions   | standing long jump) Straight arm pull down prone bridge 50 m fc swim                                                      | Isokinetic dynamometer 100 m fc swim arms-only fc                                                       | 372 m fc swim drag-suit swims 50 m fc swims                                                                                       |
|----------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Control ( N )                                | No control                                                                        | 10                                                                                                                        | 11 7                                                                                                    |                                                                                                                                   |
| N )                                          |                                                                                   |                                                                                                                           | (11 in assisted                                                                                         | 9                                                                                                                                 |
| RT (                                         | 10                                                                                | 10                                                                                                                        | 15 group) 8                                                                                             | 9                                                                                                                                 |
| N, sex Age and anthropometrics (mean ± SD) a | 10, M 16-23 years; 1.72-1.89 m; 67.5-87.5 kg                                      | 10, M 10, F Control group: 16.7 ± 0.2 years; 1.7 ± 0.03 m; 63 ± 3 kg RT group: 15.7 ± 1.2 years; 1.72 ± 0.06 m; 63 ± 5 kg | 16, M 21, F 16.5 ± 3 years; 1.71 ± 0.13 m; 67 ± 21 kg 15, M Control group: 16 ± 3 years; 1.75 ± 0.05 m; | 72 ± 8 kg RT group: 16 ± 3 years; 1.75 ± 0.05 m; 72 ± 8 kg 10, M 8, F Control group: 19.0 ± 1.8 years RT group: 19.3 ± 0.87 years |
| Level                                        | National                                                                          | National                                                                                                                  | Regional/ County                                                                                        | Collegiate                                                                                                                        |
| Training programme                           | et al. [29] 24 weeks NR swim/week 2-4/week RT                                     | training Weston et al. [33] 12 weeks 8/week swim 3/week RT                                                                | resistance training et al. [2] 3 weeks 10/week swim 2/week RT Konstantaki 6 weeks C 5/week swim (1.5 h) | 3/week RT 5 weeks 9/week swim (18 h) 3/week RT                                                                                    |
| References                                   | Song                                                                              | Core                                                                                                                      | Swim-specific Girold et al. [34]                                                                        | Dragunas et al. [35]                                                                                                              |

<!-- image -->

Table 1 continued

| Swim test a                           | 25 m fc swim 50 m fc swim                                                                                         |
|---------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Strength test a                       | MAD-device                                                                                                        |
| Control ( N )                         | 11                                                                                                                |
| RT ( N )                              | 11                                                                                                                |
| PEDro scale                           | 6                                                                                                                 |
| Age and anthropometrics (mean ± SD) a | M F Control group: 18.5 ± 3.3 1.78 ± 0.08 m; 69.2 ± 7.8 kg RT group: 18.4 ± 2.1 years; 1.79 ± 0.07 m; 72.3 ± 8 kg |
| Level N, sex                          | Competitive swimmers (competed at Dutch nationals) 16, 6,                                                         |
| Training programme                    | weeks swim (1.5 h and km/swim session) 3/week RT                                                                  |
|                                       | and [36] 10 8/week 4.5                                                                                            |
| References                            | Toussaint Vervoorn                                                                                                |

<!-- image -->

In the interest of brevity, baseline and post-test distances were all converted to metres Weston et al. [33] found large improvements in 50 m swimming performance in the core training group, and Dragunas et al. [35] found a small effect ( p \ 0.05) on stroke length and a trivial effect on 50 m swimming performance in a drag-suit training group. There was a trivial effect ( p \ 0.001) on stroke length, and small effects ( p \ 0.05) on both stroke rate and 50 m swimming performance in the control group.

Several method-related issues were apparent in the review, including the absence of control groups [29, 30], a lack of randomised controlled trials [7, 16, 19, 29-31, 33, 36], and sex bias [16, 19, 28-30, 34], with more specific method-related issues requiring greater attention. Intervention durations ranged from 3 [2] to 24 weeks [29]. Low participant numbers were also a feature of the included studies, ranging from 7 [30] to 37 [2]. A range of statistical analysis methods were used, including significance levels, effect sizes and confidence intervals. Different timing systems were used across the reviewed studies, with some using stopwatches [19, 33, 35], others using electronic timing systems [28-30, 36], and several studies not specifying how the timing data were collected [2, 7, 16, 18, 32, 34]. Different pool lengths were used in the studies reviewed, including 25 m pools [2, 7, 18, 32], 22.9 m pools [16, 19, 28, 30, 34] and 50 m pools [29, 33, 36]; in some cases the pool size was not stated [31, 35].

A range of strength assessment tools were used to monitor the changes in strength across the reviewed studies. Many studies [2, 18, 28, 30, 32] used an isokinetic dynamometer to measure arm extensor and flexor strength at different angular velocities, including concentric, eccentric and isometric contractions. Other methods used to quantify changes in strength included bilateral shoulder extension [7], a straight arm pull down test [33] and a shoulder extension test [30]. Swimming-specific strength assessment tools, such as the biokinetic swim bench [16, 28], MAD device [36] and tethered swimming [7], were also used to assess changes in strength.

## 4 Discussion

## 4.1 Method-Related Considerations

There were important method-related inconsistencies that needed consideration when critically evaluating the findings of this systematic review. Common method-related considerations focus on the lack of control groups [29, 30], lack of randomised controlled trials [7, 16, 19, 29-31, 33, 36] and sex bias [16, 19, 28-30, 34], with more specific method-related issues requiring greater attention. To begin with, interventions included in this review varied in duration from 3 [2] to 24 weeks [29], with most studies lasting

Table 2 Summary of resistance-training programme, relevant strength tests, technical parameters (stroke length, stroke rate) and swimming performance results

## Author's personal copy

| Swimming performance (m.s - 1 ) b                 | Control group: 91.44 m: 1.83 ± 0.04 to 1.81 ± 0.04 RT group: 91.44 m: 1.76 ± 0.08 to                                                            | 1.81 ± 0.06 Control group: NR RT group: 50 m: 2 ± 1.3%*                                                                                                                           | Control group: NR RT group: 25 m: 1.83 ± 0.1 to 1.91 ± 0.1** 50 m: 1.77 ± 0.08 to 1.81 ± 0.08**                                                                                                                          | Control group: 50 m: 1.69 ± 0.1 to 1.71 ± 0.1 c 100 m: 1.54 ± 0.1 to 1.56 ± 0.12 c 400 m: 1.38 ± 0.08 to 1.38 ± 0.08 c RT group: 50 m: 1.73 ± 0.12 to 1.75 ± 0.11 c 100 m: 1.59 ± 0.1 to 1.61 ± 0.1 c 400 m: 1.38 ± 0.16 to 1.4 ± 0.08 c *                         |
|---------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Stroke rate                                       | (m) 1.79 ± 0.12 1.9 ± 0.31 Control group: (5 strokes.min - 1 ) 62.6 ± 4.6 to 61.0 ± 3.9 RT group: (5 strokes.min - 1 ) 60.3 ± 5.2 to 58.3 ± 8.2 | (m) to 2.10 ± 0.02 to 2.11 ± 0.01* Control group: (cycles.min - 1 ) 53.5 ± 2.4 to 53.9 ± 2.3 RT group: (cycles.min - 1 ) 54.7 ± 4.1 to 55.9 ± 2.7                                 | (m) (m) to 0.26** to Control group: (cycles.min - 1 ) NR RT group: (cycle.min - 1 ) 25 m 55 ± 4 to 53.5 ± 3.4* 50 m: 56.7 ± 3.2 to 54.7 ± 3.6*                                                                           | 0.24** extension: Control group: (m) 1.74 ± 0.3 to 1.80 ± 0.15 RT group: (m) 1.68 ± 0.17 to 1.73 ± 0.16 Control group: (hertz) 0.885 ± 0.078 to 0.872 ± 0.078 RT group: (hertz) 0.953 ± 0.090 to 0.930 ± 0.074                                                     |
| tests a Stroke length                             | group: no significant difference group: No significant difference Control group: 1.77 ± 0.14 to RT group: (m) 1.87 ± 0.37 to                    | group: No significant difference group: Extensors-concentric (60 ° s - 1 ): 11.2 ± 13.6* Extensors-concentric Control group: 2.08 ± 0.03 RT group: (m) 2.05 ± 0.01                | (180 ° s - 1 ): 16.9 ± 11.7* Control group: NR RT group: Max arm extension force (N): 354 ± 62 to 396 ± 61** Rate of force development (N s - 1 ): Control group: NR RT group: 25 m: 2.01 ± 0.24 2.16 ± 50 m: 1.88 ± 0.1 | 4.01 ± 0.8 to 4.96 ± 1.2** 2.01 ± Control group: Bilateral shoulder 277.9 ± 44.2 to 310.7 ± 56.2* Tethered swim: 114.4 ± 17.3 to 118.1 ± 18.3 RT group: Bilateral shoulder extension: 318.8 ± 89.8 to 383.5 ± 89.3** Tethered swim: 124.9 ± 23.2 to 133.5 ± 21.9** |
| References Resistance-training programme Strength | Biokinetic swim-bench training Roberts et al. [28] Biokinetic swim bench; (4 9 10 s max) 9 4; rest 30 s Control RT                              | Traditional resistance training Girold et al. [32] Strength: 3 sets, 6 reps; pull ups, latissimus pull downs, swim-bench latissimus pull downs; rest 2 min; 80-90% 1RM Control RT | Strass [31] Training the arm extensor muscles using a barbell (80-90%): 3 reps 9 3 at 90%; 2 reps 9 3 at 95%; 1 rep 9 1 at 100% Assisted exercises for the arm flexors and trunk also conducted but NR                   | Aspenes et al. [7] 5 reps 9 3; latissimus pull downs Swimming: 4 9 4 min fc high intensity; rest 3 min active; 90-95% and 60-75%, respectively                                                                                                                     |

<!-- image -->

Table 2 continued

| Swimming performance (m.s - 1 ) b   | Control group: 50 m: 0.9 ± 1.2% RT group: 50 m: 2.8 ± 2.5%*                                                                                                                   | Weighted assisted group: 22.9 m: 2.04 ± 0.01 to 2.1 ± 0.05* 365.8 m: 1.43 ± 0.02 to 1.49 ± 0.01* c Traditional weight-training group: 22.9 m: NR 365.8 m: 1.43 ± 0.3 to 1.49 ± 0.02* c                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
|-------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Stroke rate                         | 0.08 ± 0.09 Control group: (cycle.min - 1 ) 47.8 ± 3.7 to 48.7 ± 3.7* RT group: (cycle.min - 1 ) 48.9 ± 4.98 to 50.7 ± 3.71                                                   | (m) Weeks 4-12 Weighted assisted group: (time to complete 4 stroke cycles) 5.83 ± 0.14 to 5.84 ± 0.25 Traditional weight-training group: to complete 4 stroke cycles) 6.29 ± 0.67 to 6.01 ± 0.36 (time to complete 4 stroke cycles)                                                                                                                                                             |
| Stroke length                       | Control group: (m) 1.56 ± 0.09 to 1.56 ± RT group: (m) 1.61 ± 0.11 to 1.59                                                                                                    | 2.6 NR* Weeks 4-12 Weighted assisted group: 2.09 ± 0.05 to 2.17 ± 0.07 Traditional weight-training group: (m) 2.24 ± 0.17 to 2.24 ± 0.12                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |
| Strength tests a                    | Control group: Extensors (180 8 s - 1 ): 15.7 ± 10.6* RT group: Extensors-isometric: 45.5 ± 38.7* Extensors-concentric (60 8 s - 1 ): 33.7 ± 27.6* Extensors (180 8 .s - 1 ): | 39.5 ± 32.4* Weighted assisted group: Pull ups: 0 kg: 9.6 ± 2.6 to 16 (66.7%) 13.6 kg: 9.2 ± 0.7 to 26.3 ± 5.6 (185.8%) 22.7 kg: 12 ± 1.1 to 62.5 ± 6 (420.8%) Tricep dips: 0 kg: 20.2 ± 3.8 to 41 ± 6.9 (102.9%) 13.6 kg: 12.6 ± 1.5 40 ± 3.1 (217.5%) 22.7 kg: 14.4 ± 2 to 80.5 ± 4.2 (459%) No statistical significance reported Biokinetic swim bench Traditional weight-training group: NR |
| Resistance-training programme       | Dry-land: 6 reps 9 3; bench press, pull up, barbell draws, squats, plyometrics; 80-90%; rest 2 min Control: 1 9 (run/cycle) [60-70%]                                          | Weight-assisted group: dips and pull ups, until failure. Set 1: no weight; Set 2: 13.6 kg; Set 3: 22.7 kg Traditional weight-lifting group: latissimus pull downs, elbow extension and flexion, bent-arm fly, quadriceps extensions, hamstring flexion. 8-12 reps; 3 sets/exercise                                                                                                              |
| References                          | Girold et al. [18]                                                                                                                                                            | Trappe and Pearson [19]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |

<!-- image -->

Table 2 continued

| Swimming performance (m.s - 1 )          | Control group: 22.9 m fc: no values reported* RT group: 22.9 m fc: no values reported* Control group: NR RT group: 22.9 m: 0.95 ± 0.03 to 0.99 ± 0.04 c 91.44 m: 1.81 ± 0.35 to 1.82 ± 0.2 c 182.88 m: 1.64 ± 0.04 to 1.66 ± 0.06 c                                                                                                                                                                                                              |
|------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Stroke rate                              | NR Not recorded                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
| Stroke length                            | swim-bench test: fc swim: swim-bench test: fc swim: NR (m) dorsiflexion: to to and flexion: to to and to to - 1 ): Not recorded                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
| Strength tests a                         | Control group: Biokinetic NR* 22.9 m tethered NR* RT group: Biokinetic NR* 22.9 m tethered NR* 40%; cycle side Control group: NR RT group: Plantar and R: 17.21 ± 78.03 16.99 ± 120.15* L: 21.98 ± 82.71 16.87 ± 125.65* Knee extension R: 116.57 ± 610.77 111.8 ± 736.48* L: 93.97 ± 586.93 85.91 ± 701.62* Shoulder extension flexion: R: 68.08 ± 334.99 65.18 ± 427.49* L: 70.55 ± 332.55 55.83 ± 431.52* Ergometer (rev.min 146.83 ± 10.4 to |
| References Resistance-training programme | Tanaka et al. [16] 8-12 reps; 3 sets; tricep dips, pull ups, latissimus pull downs, tricep extensions, bent over fly Manning et al. [30] Circuit; 1 min on and rest 30 s Weeks 1-3: 30%; weeks 4-6: Weeks 7-9: 50% 1RM Exercises: leg extension, bench press, sit-ups with weight, shoulder press, skipping, latissimus pull down, leg flexion, arm curl, ergometer, shoulder shrug, bend                                                        |

<!-- image -->

Table 2 continued

| Swimming performance (m.s -   | Mean improvement: ( ? ) 1.3% Range: ( - ) 6.9% to ( ? )4.2% [ p -value NR]                                                                                                                             | 50 m fc swim: 90% confidence interval Control group: 50 m: 0.7%; 1.6 to 0.2 Intervention group: 50 m: 2.7%; 4.2 to 1.1 (large)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |
|-------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Stroke rate                   | Not recorded                                                                                                                                                                                           | Not recorded                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
| Stroke length                 | Not recorded                                                                                                                                                                                           | Not recorded                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
| Strength tests a              | RT group: Lower back strength: 1.4-17.3%* Grip strength: Dominant arm: 7.3-8.3%** Nondominant arm: 5.9-6.7%* Ball throw: 5.7-9.7%** Sargent jump: 8.6-11.6%** Standing long jump:                      | 2.2-5%* 5 Control group: Straight arm pull down: ( ? )2.5; - 2.9 to 8.1 Prone bridge: ( ? )4.7; 0.2-9.3 RT group: Straight arm pull down: ( ? )26.2; 19.6-33.1 Prone bridge: ( ? )14.1; 9.2-19.2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
| Resistance-training programme | Adaptation phase: 11 exercises; 10-12 reps 9 3, 40-70%, 4 weeks, 4/week; max strength phase: 9 exercises; 3-7 reps 9 4-5, 85-100%, 4/week; power endurance phase: 6 exercises 7-10 9 3, 70-80%, 2/week | Prone bridge and side bridge: 30 s (weeks 1-2), 60 s (weeks 3-4), 90 s (weeks 5-8), 120 s (weeks 9-12) Straight leg raises and bird dog: 10 reps (weeks 1-2), 15 (weeks 3-4), 20 (weeks 5-6), 25 (weeks 7-10), 30 (weeks 11-12) Overhead squat and sit and twist ( ? reps weeks 1-4): 10 (3 kg; weeks 1-2), 10 (4 kg; weeks 3-4), 15 (5 kg; weeks 5-6), 20 (6 kg; weeks 7-8), 20 (7 kg; weeks 9-10), 25 (7 kg) Shoulder press: 10 reps (weeks 1-4), 15 (weeks 5-6), 20 (weeks 7-10), 25 (weeks 11-12) |
| References                    | Song et al. [29]                                                                                                                                                                                       | Core training Weston et al. [33]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |

<!-- image -->

Table 2 continued

## Author's personal copy

| Swimming performance (m.s - 1 ) b   | Control group: 100 m: 1.47 ± 0.13 to 1.46 ± 0.13 c                                                                                                                                                   | RT group:                                  | 100 m: 1.48 ± 0.1 to 1.51 ± 0.09* c Control group: 372 m: 1.15 ± 0.03 to 1.16 ± 0.03 c RT group: 372 m: 1.17 ± 0.04 to 1.18 ± 0.06 c Control group: 50 m: Effect size = 0.265(small)* RT group: 50 m: Effect size = 0.006(trivial)*   |
|-------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Stroke rate                         | Control group: (cycle.min - 1 ) 43.5 ± 4.92 to 42.2 ± 3.56 RT group: (cycle.min - 1 ) 42.32 ± 4.98 to 43.01 ± 3.91* Not recorded                                                                     | Control group: (strokes.min - 1            | SE = 0.652 Effect size = 0.226 (small)* RT group: (strokes.min - 1 ) SE = 0.652                                                                                                                                                       |
| Stroke length                       | Control group: (m.min 1.95 ± 0.2 to 2.01 ± RT group: (m.min - 1 ) 2.03 ± 0.18 to 2.01 ±                                                                                                              | Control group: SE = 0.015                  | Not recorded (m) Effect size = 0.133 (trivial)*** RT group: (m)                                                                                                                                                                       |
| Strength tests a                    | Control group: Flexors-isometric: 15.5 ± 16.8* RT group: Flexors-concentric (60 8 s - 1 ): 8.6 ± 9.1* Flexors-concentric (180 8 s - 1 ): 14 ± 15.3* Extensors-isometric: 31.5 ± 24.9* Control group: | RT group: 14.02 ± 3.6%* Drag-suit group:   | pull 1.6 ± 0.5% m s min NR Control group: NR                                                                                                                                                                                          |
| Resistance-training programme       | training swim: s max fc, rest 30 s Arms only: Elastic band around ankles and                                                                                                                         | buoy in between upper leg 1333 m arms only | Set 1: 3 9 22.9 m sprint ? 182.8 submax swim Set 2: 4 9 22.9 m sprints ? 30 m submax swim sprints ? 1                                                                                                                                 |
|                                     | resistance Resisted 6 9 30                                                                                                                                                                           | al. [35] Drag suit:                        | interval ? 182.8 Set 3: 16 9 25 m                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
| References                          | [2] Konstantaki et al. [34]                                                                                                                                                                          | Dragunas et                                |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |
|                                     | Swim-specific Girold et al.                                                                                                                                                                          |                                            |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Table 2 continued

| Swimming performance (m.s - 1 ) b   | Control group: 25 m: 1.88 ± 0.11 to 1.89 ± 0.11 50 m: 1.74 ± 0.1 to 1.74 ± 0.09 c RT group: 25 m: 1.9 ± 0.13 to 1.92 ± 1.11 c 50 m: 1.75 ± 0.1 to 1.77 ± 0.1 c increase in time, ? decrease in time, RT                                                        |
|-------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Stroke rate                         | Not recorded second, W watts,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
| Stroke length                       | Not recorded Newtons, N . s                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |
| Strength tests a                    | Control group: Power (W): 143.4 ± 39.4 to 142.5 ± 39 Force (N): 82.8 ± 18.7 to 80.9 RT group: Power (W): 160.4 ± 43.0 to 171 ± 51.3* Force (N): 91 ± 19.7 to 94 rev . min - 1 revolutions per                                                                  |
| Resistance-training programme       | Sample programme: 20 9 23 m lengths; every 35 s: 1 length sprinting on the POP, the other swimming back slowly 10 9 23 m lengths kicking 6 9 23 m lengths; every 110 s: 3 9 (1 length sprint on POP, 1 length butterfly) second, 8 . s - 1 degrees per second, |
| References                          | Toussaint and Vervoorn [36] m . s - 1 metres                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |

0.001

\

p

0.01, *** indicates

\

p

-values and effect sizes (where reported) are shown

p

In the interest of brevity, only significant

a

In the interest of brevity, swimming performance is reported in metres per second

b

For consistency, seconds were converted to metres per second

c

between 3 and 12 weeks. The greater the duration of the intervention, the greater the probability of a significant adaptation occurring. Participant numbers also ranged from 7 [30] to 37 [2]. Specifically, low participant numbers reduced the statistical power of the studies and therefore the merits of such studies needed to be evaluated in this context. In terms of statistical reporting, the use of significance levels, effect sizes and confidence levels were inconsistent, with more recent research (e.g. Weston et al. [33]) employing effect sizes and confidence intervals. It is important to note that the range of improvement of athletes is related to the athlete's initial training state, and more elite performers have a reduced range of improvement. Therefore, effect sizes are becoming a more popular and relevant statistic for analysis of athletic populations. Different timing systems were used across the reviewed studies, with some using stopwatches [19, 33, 35], others using electronic timing systems [28-30, 36] and several studies not specifying how the timing data were collected [2, 7, 16, 18, 32, 34]. The stopwatch has been shown to produce faster times (0.04-0.24) than electronic timing systems [37, 38] and would be deemed an unreliable method for collecting data in a number of sports/contexts. Finally, the different types of pools that were used in the studies reviewed make it hard to determine whether increases in swimming performance were due to an increase in swimming velocity or an increase in ground reaction forces while turning and diving. Within this review, some studies used 25 m pools [2, 7, 18, 32], others used 22.9 m pools [16, 19, 28, 30, 34] and some used 50 m pools [29, 33, 36]. The pool size was not stated in some of the reviewed studies [31, 35]. These method-related considerations in study designs are important when interpreting the findings of these studies.

## 4.2 Strength Diagnostics

A range of resistance-training interventions were considered in this review. To assess the effectiveness of these, valid and reliable strength tests are required to monitor changes in performance following the interventions. Pichon et al. [39] stated that strength tests need to be specific to the movement pattern of swimming, while Newton et al. [10] emphasised the importance of assessing multi-joint exercises in strength testing rather than isolated exercises, since multi-joint exercises represent the coordinated effort, whereas isolated exercises may lack validity as they do not examine the overall force generation capabilities.

For strength assessment, many studies have used the isokinetic dynamometer [2, 18, 28, 30, 32] and tested arm extensor and flexor strength at different angular velocities.

Although arm extension is very applicable to front crawl (freestyle) swimming, this test lacks specificity of the multi-joint movements and changes in velocities throughout the propulsive phase that occur in front-crawl swimming. Isometric testing used the isokinetic dynamometer conducted with the arm at a 90 ° position, which represents the specific mid-stroke position [40]. However, while it does not mimic the dynamic nature of swimming, isometric testing has been shown to have a strong relationship ( r = 0.61-0.72) with dynamic strength performance [41]. Nonetheless, it is clear that isometric testing has the ability to examine maximum force at specific stroke phases and may therefore be a useful strength assessment tool for swimming coaches and practitioners. Other studies have used more specific dynamic methods to measure maximal strength, including shoulder extension as this is important in the propulsive phase of front-crawl swimming. Of particular note, Aspenes et al. [7] assessed bilateral shoulder extension strength by means of a cable crossover apparatus from a starting position of 170 ± 10 ° of shoulder flexion, Weston et al. [33] conducted a straight arm pull down test, and Manning et al. [30] conducted a shoulder extension test. Biokinetic swim bench [16, 28], MAD device [36] and tethered swimming [7] are three other methods that are deemed specific to swimming performance. The biokinetic swim bench and the MAD device are discussed further in Sects. 4.3.1 and 4.4.4, respectively. Tethered swimming has been shown to be similar to front-crawl swimming in terms of muscle activation [42] and propulsive forces ( r = 0.92, p \ 0.01) [43]. This may be a useful tool to monitor the transference of resistance-training exercises to actual swimming performance.

## 4.3 Dry-Land Resistance-Training Modalities

## 4.3.1 Biokinetic Swim-Bench Training

The biokinetic swim bench is posited to mimic swimming performance without the use of the lower extremities [14]. The swimmer lies prone on a sliding bench with a slight incline, arms outstretched over his/her head and hands secured in hand paddles. The swimmer is then able to pull along the sliding bench and therefore mimic the kinematics of front-crawl swimming. Insufficient elbow control during this movement can generate inaccurate findings [31] and this is an important limitation that needs attention. The maximal power produced on the swim bench has been shown to have a strong relationship ( r = 0.92) with swimming velocity in semi-tethered conditions [44]; however, the biokinetic swim bench still lacks specificity as the pulling pathway of the hand is longer and the distribution of pulling forces at various joint angles is not similar to swimming in water [45]. Tanaka et al. [16] used the biokinetic swim bench to monitor strength improvements from a traditional resistance-training programme. Despite finding no significant improvement in maximal power produced on the biokinetic swim bench, significant ( p \ 0.05) improvements in swimming performance were observed. This highlights the necessity for specificity when choosing resistance-training exercises.

Roberts et al. [28] designed an intervention with highvelocity swim training and biokinetic swim-bench training sessions performed three times weekly in a 22.9 m pool. It is important to note that pool length and the inclusion of all male participants affects the practical applications of this study, as mentioned in Sect. 4.1. The results showed that swimming performance in both the control group and the biokinetic swim-bench group did not improve. This may be due to the intervention group being more fatigued because of the biokinetic swim-bench intervention period, compared with the control group. Because of the limited research and conflicting results, it is hard to determine the transfer of biokinetic swim-bench training to swimming performance. Lack of improvement may be due to the increased stability provided by lying on a stable surface compared with the relative instability of the water, and the inability to replicate the drag propulsion relationship on land. The biokinetic swim bench lacks specificity and does not transfer to significantly improve swimming performance.

## 4.3.2 Traditional Resistance Training

Traditional resistance training is widely used in many sports and involves conventional gym-based resistancetraining exercises such as bench press, latissimus pull downs, tricep extensions, tricep dips, bent-arm flies, pull ups and squats. Low-volume, high-velocity/force resistance-training programmes resulted in significant improvements in swimming performance. Trappe and Pearson [19] found that a resistance-training programme for 6 weeks resulted in a significant improvement in 22.9 m front crawl sprint performance. Girold et al. [32] found a 2% increase in 50 m performance in a resistancetraining group, which is similar to the 2.1% increase reported by Strass [31] and the 2.8% increase reported by Girold et al. [18]. Strass [31] also found improvements in maximal explosive force production compared with maximal force production, and the authors proposed that this could be due to various neuromuscular adaptations. Neuromuscular adaptations refer to improved motor unit recruitment, synchronisation, co-contraction, rate coding, intraand inter-neuromuscular coordination and neural inhibition. This gain in explosive force production transferred to swimming performance with a significant increase in velocity ( p \ 0.01). Furthermore, Aspenes et al. [7]

<!-- image -->

employed a similar training intervention method and found a 20.3% improvement in dry-land strength. The control group increased by 11.8%, and it may be possible that the control group increased dry-land strength due to familiarisation with the testing procedures, or the improvement resulted from the prescribed swimming programme. Despite this, improvements did not transfer to significant improvements in 50 and 100 m swimming performance; however, 400 m performance did improve significantly, with a mean decrease in swimming time of 3.74 s.

By contrast, the applications of high-volume resistancetraining programmes appear to have no significant effect on swimming performance. Song et al. [29] used a periodised gym-based programme (24 weeks) with four phases: (1) adaptation; (2) maximum strength; (3) power endurance; and (4) maximum strength and power/endurance. In the case of this study, strength improvements were observed, ranging from a 21% increase in sit-ups to a 20-25% increase in power clean. It is likely that the initial increase in strength can be associated firstly with neuromuscular adaptations affecting fast-twitch muscle fibres, and, secondly, with improvement of the exercise technique (i.e. power clean). Manning et al. [30] designed a traditional dry-land resistance circuit, consisting of various upper body, lower body and core exercises, each performed for 1 min to mimic the swimmer's event duration. The training programme was designed to target specific muscle groups involved in front-crawl swimming, and exercises were completed with maximum velocity to maximally recruit the appropriate motor units. Despite increased muscle power most likely resulting from neurological adaptation, Manning et al. [30] did not find a significant increase in swimming performance, which may be due to the hypertrophic nature of the training programme prescribed, and residual fatigue may have been a key factor. Tanaka et al. [16] found that swimmers in a resistance-training intervention group increased strength by 27-35%, but this improvement did not transfer to swimming performance. The heavy demands of both swimming and resistance training may have caused local muscular fatigue and inhibited the development of maximal swimming power, although serum cortisol, an indicator for overtraining, did not change over the course of the season. This reinforces that training modalities need to be swim-specific to translate to improved swimming performance.

The results of this systematic review are consistent with the view that traditional resistance training improves swimming performance. Girold et al. [32], Girold et al. [18], Strass [31] and Aspenes et al. [7] all found that traditional resistance-training methods increased dry-land strength and found significant improvements in swimming performance. Each of these studies used high velocities during the concentric phase and this has been linked to greater neuromuscular adaptations and recruitment of type II muscle fibres [46-48]. Girold et al. [32], Girold et al. [18] and Aspenes et al. [7] all employed low repetition ranges (1-6 repetitions) with a low number of sets ( B 3 sets), whereas Strass [31] prescribed a range of sets across a low number of repetitions for one exercise (i.e. three sets of three repetitions, three sets of two repetitions and one set of one repetition). This method of programming will result in less neuromuscular fatigue. These adaptations, along with greater specificity (resistance exercises specific to the event, both in terms of muscle groups and velocity, to produce optimal performance enhancements), which has been mentioned in several of the studies, may lead to the significant transfer to swimming performance [7, 17-19, 30]. This indicates that lower volume (low number of sets and repetitions), high-intensity (high velocity/force) resistance-training programmes induce less neuromuscular fatigue and greater strength and neuromuscular improvements, which may positively influence swimming performance [11]. This is in agreement with Ramos Veliz et al. [49], who prescribed a low-volume, high-velocity/force resistance-training programme to elite waterpolo players. However, no control group [29], sex bias [7, 18, 31, 32], lack of randomised controlled design [7, 29, 31] and intervention durations lasting less than 8 weeks [18, 31, 32] are a feature of the previously mentioned studies. The specific timing system used was only documented in one study [29]. Furthermore, three of the studies used a 25 m pool [7, 18, 31] and one study used a 50 m pool [29], with Strass [31] not reporting pool length. These shortcomings can alter the practical application of these studies, with intervention length, lack of control groups and randomised controlled design affecting the quality and interpretation of the studies. Conversely, Tanaka et al. [16], Trappe and Pearson [19] and Manning et al. [30] found an increase in dry-land strength, with no increase in swimming performance. This may have been due to the hypertrophic nature of these programmes (Table 2) [50], which can impair performance by increasing resistive forces and decreasing the force-to-mass ratio. The increase in volume of these programmes would have caused an increase in neuromuscular fatigue and would therefore have inhibited the anabolic environment necessary for recovery and strength development.

<!-- image -->

## 4.3.3 Core Training

Core training is commonly practiced in elite sport. In swimming, core stability is essential due to the unstable nature of water. During each stroke cycle, propulsive forces are produced through the hand, which create a dynamic reaction about the rotational axes of the vertebrae causing an increase in lateral movement, increase in excessive kicking movements and therefore a decrease in propulsive efficiency. Due to this instability, muscular strength and endurance in core muscles is required to absorb these forces. Weston et al. [33] demonstrated significant improvements in swimmers' core function and swimming performance due to the inclusion of an isolated core programme, while Dingley et al. [51] found similar results with paraplegic athletes, where the increase in swimming performance was largely attributed to the increase in core stability of the athletes. Dynamic exercises such as 'bird dog' [33] enhanced stability and control of the gluteus maximus, external oblique abdominis, gluteus medius and other specific muscle groups. Weston et al. [33] identified difficulties in designing a core programme that matched the biomechanical complexity of the core muscle functions in swimming. Furthermore, the use of a manual stopwatch to determine times would have affected the quality of data obtained in this study. Despite this, the study found moderate to large improvements in peak electromyography (EMG) activity of the latissimus dorsi, external oblique abdominis and lumbar extensor muscles during isolated core tests. Therefore, the introduction of core exercises may have increased stability in the lumbar and thoracic regions through a variety of these exercises; however, it is important to highlight that no randomised controlled trials have been conducted specifically exploring this.

## 4.4 Swim-Specific Resistance Training

## 4.4.1 Resisted-Band Swim Training

Resistive bands have been used as a resistance-training exercise modality and have been shown to have significant effects on swimming performance. In this training modality, an elastic band is securely attached to the diving block and a belt with the elastic band is attached around the swimmer's waist. The athlete swims out against the resistance of the elastic band. Girold et al. [2] found a 1.9% improvement in performance over 100 m following resistive-band training, however inconsistencies in the application of the methods in this study rendered the findings unreliable. This included a 3-week intervention period, no reporting of the specific timing system used and the use of a 25 m pool, all of which could have affected the quality of the study. In a subsequent study, Girold et al. [18] found significant improvements ( p \ 0.05) in 50 m swimming performance, with a 32% increase in strength, but unfortunately the use of combined resisted and assisted training excluded this study from the current systematic review. Girold et al. [2] showed that the use of in-water resistance training can increase swimming performance, and emphasised the need for swim-specific resistance training

[52, 53], which is in agreement with Delecluse et al. [54], who suggested that high resistances enhance power due to adaptive changes to the neuromuscular system. The greatest improvements in strength were observed in the isometric condition which was conducted at a 90 8 angle at the arm; this is the specific mid-stroke swimming position between the pulling and pushing phase [55]. Therefore, a gain in muscle strength in this position may have been the significant indicator of improvement in swimming performance. This emphasises the need for specificity of training modalities. Santos-Garcia et al. [56] showed that an increase in swimming performance can be observed after four rounds of a swim-specific resistance-training exercise (i.e. resistive elastic bands), followed by a maximum sprint. This suggests the requirement for extensive warmups to ensure maximum swimming performance. It is plausible that the use of resistive elastic bands as a resistance-training tool promotes an increase in swimming performance [2, 56] and provides a dynamic resistancetraining method that develops muscle strength specific to swimming. This is consistent with De Villarreal et al. [57], who found that specific in-water resistance exercises improved waterpolo-specific performance skills, re-emphasising the necessity for specificity.

## 4.4.2 Arms-Only Training

Arms-only training is commonly used in elite swimming and is believed to increase upper body resistance in a swimming-specific manner by overloading the specific upper body muscles; therefore, arms-only training can be seen as a resistance exercise rather than an endurance exercise. When compared with whole-body swimming, arms-only swimming (using a pull buoy to increase the buoyancy of the swimmer) reduces maximal oxygen uptake [58, 59] at the same relative intensity. This training modality can be used to reduce total training load while maintaining swimming fitness and volume. Konstantaki et al. [34] replaced regular swimming training with armsonly training three times a week, consisting of swimming exercises and drills (i.e. breathing drills, one arm only, hand paddles, pull buoy, etc.). Significant improvements were noted in arms-only peak exercise intensity, ventilatory threshold and movement economy, but with no significant transfer to swimming performance. This lack of transfer may be due to the loss of coordination between the arms and legs, as swimming speed, type of kick used (2, 4 or 6 beat) and swimming proficiency are factors that rely on coordination. Isolation of the arms may add additional external torque due to the changes in body roll and stability in the water. It may be suggested that a longer period of time is needed for the body to adapt to this increase in external torque, with sex bias, unknown timing system and a 22.9 m pool all affecting the quality and practical application of this study. The study also used a pull buoy, which provides extra buoyancy and support, and which, in turn, reduces the activation and stabilisation of the core muscles. This reinforces the vital role of the core muscles in maintaining an optimal body position, as described by Morris et al. [60], for elite swimming performance. Despite its limitations, arms-only training still has a very important role in swimming performance. It may be necessary to isolate the legs, using an elastic band around the ankles rather than a pull buoy, to create greater core activation and maintain an optimal body position [60]. While the research is not conclusive, it is plausible that an integration of armsonly swimming in the training programme may improve the transfer to swimming performance.

<!-- image -->

## 4.4.3 Drag-Suit Training

Training specificity is a key element in the enhancement of swimming performance. Drag suits have been worn by swimmers worldwide and are commercially advertised as a training tool. Drag suits are traditionally considered an endurance training modality but due to the increase in propulsion and consequent increase in work output, their use can be considered a resistance exercise. The concept behind drag suits is that the mesh clothing retains water and therefore increases the resistive drag forces. Dragunas et al. [35] showed no significant improvement in swimming performance while wearing a drag suit for 5 weeks compared with the control group. This may be due to the adaptation from drag-suit training requiring longer than 5 weeks, with sex bias, use of a stopwatch, and not reporting pool length all affecting the quality and results of this study. Training under drag-suit training conditions on a daily basis may change the body position and 'feel for the water' [61], which may result in slower swimming times without the drag suit. Previous research has shown that there are no acute alterations in kinematic characteristics of front-crawl swimming while using parachutes [62], a similar concept to drag-suit training. To date, no research has examined the chronic effect of parachute or drag-suit training on kinematic characteristics, and it is unknown whether chronic training under drag-suit conditions alters body position and affects swimming performance.

## 4.4.4 Measurement of Active Drag (MAD) Device

Toussaint and Vervoorn [36] used the MAD device, a specific in-water system to measure mechanical power output as well as active drag during front-crawl swimming, in their study [22]. The MAD device consists of 16 pushoff pads, 1.35 m apart on a 23 m horizontal rod 0.8 m below the water surface. The system requires the swimmer to push off the resistance pads submerged under the water at fixed points. The force exerted on these fixed points is then recorded through a force transducer. This device is highly specific to swimming but requires several familiarisation trials to produce a reliable and valid result. A training device known as the POP (push-off pad) device was used to mimic the MAD device during the 10-week training intervention period designed by Toussaint and Vervoorn [36]. Toussaint and Vervoorn [36] found no significant improvements in 25 and 50 m swimming performance; however, competition results showed significant improvements in 50 and 200 m swimming performance compared with the control group, but 100 m swimming performance did not significantly improve compared with the control group. This increase in power, velocity and force may be due to the added resistance encountered by propelling off the fixed pads rather than water. Clarys et al. [63] found similar EMG patterns when comparing the MADdevice and free swimming, which would suggest that the MAD device is task-specific. The high correlation between competition swimming performance and force, velocity and power, from this study, may suggest that the MAD device is a sensitive device to monitor training improvements and the transfer of resistance-training modalities. The authors of this study also suggest that the MAD device can force the swimmer to swim more symmetrically due to the fixed depth and distance of the pads, which is an important practical feature of the MAD device. Although the findings of this study are positive, the compliance of the participants was poor and therefore the findings need to be interpreted with this in mind. Furthermore, no randomised controlled trials have been conducted in this area and the available data should therefore be interpreted with caution.

<!-- image -->

## 5 Biomechanical Parameters

Stroke length and stroke rate are the two biomechanical parameters that are investigated in the majority of studies, and have been linked to improvements in swimming performance. Many studies have highlighted the importance of stroke length in improving swimming performance [2, 20, 64-68] and therefore maintaining mechanical propulsive efficiency throughout the race. Stroke rate has been determined as a key factor in 50 m performance compared with other swimming distances [18], and has been known to influence swimming velocity [3, 64, 67]. Swimming velocity is the product of stroke length (metres per stroke cycle) and stroke rate (strokes per minute) [69], therefore these technical parameters are important determinants of swimming velocity. Researchers have attempted to find the optimal relationship of stroke length to stroke rate for swimming performance [70] and have found that training, intensity, physiological capabilities, race distances, sex and swimming technique all influence the stroke length/stroke rate relationship [71]. Expert swimmers have been shown to maintain their stroke length and stroke rate longer than non-expert swimmers, with coaches employing various training strategies to maintain these technical parameters and achieve higher swimming velocities [72]. Five different combinations of these parameters exist: (1) increase in stroke length and stroke rate; (2) increase in stroke length and decrease in stroke rate; (3) increase in stroke rate and decrease in stroke length; (4) increase in stroke length and stabilisation of stroke rate; and (5) increase in stroke rate and stabilisation of stroke length [73]. It is therefore imperative that the calculations of stroke length and stroke rate are accurate and it is essential that this is considered before discussing the effect of resistance training on these technical parameters.

## 5.1 Calculation of Stroke Length and Stroke Rate

The calculations of stroke length and stroke rate included in this review are shown in Table 3. Many methods are used to determine stroke length and stroke rate, with different units being implemented, as observed in Table 3. Various method-related issues affect stroke rate and length determination, with the major factor being the method used to identify the start and finish of each stroke cycle. Due to measurement inconsistencies, a standardised model to determine stroke length and stroke rate is needed to ensure accurate reporting. The implementation of landmark registration could make the measurement of stroke length and stroke rate more valid and reliable. Landmark registration is an intermediate step in functional data analysis, a branch of statistical analysis that presents curves or families of curves [74]. Landmark registration identifies visible features or landmarks and realigns curves to ensure the landmarks of multiple trials (curves) are consistent. This technique allows a more effective comparison between participants without resorting to distortions of the time-base via conventional temporal normalisation techniques. In swimming, the transition of the arms from the propulsive phase (under water) to the recovery phase (above the water) will cause a clear difference in velocity, force and displacement of the armstroke cycle, and this provides an easily identifiable landmark in the curve. The advantage of landmark registration is the identification of movement patterns where the sequence of events is clearly identifiable. The disadvantage with this technique is that landmark registration will introduce a change to the raw data and therefore realigned data needs to be interpreted with some caution. A clear description of this analysis is provided by Deluzio et al. [74].

## 5.2 Stroke Length

Hay et al. [68] demonstrated that the improvement in velocity over a season was due to improvements in stroke length. Improvements in performance were observed with an increase in stroke length, and therefore an increase in velocity [68]. A decrease in velocity has been shown to be directly associated with a decrease in stroke length [67, 75]. Stroke length can therefore be shown to be an important factor in freestyle swimming [65, 66]. Girold et al. [32] and Strass [31] found an increase in stroke length, and this transferred to an increase in swimming performance. These studies used traditional resistance training with low repetitions (Girold et al. [32], six repetitions; Strass [31], three repetitions). Aspenes et al. [7] and Girold et al. [18] found no such increases in stroke length but significant increases in 400 m and 50 m swimming performance, respectively. Aspenes et al. [7] and Girold et al. [18] also used traditional resistance training with low repetitions (five and six repetitions, respectively). The results here are conflicting, therefore further clarity/additional research is needed. Toussaint and Vervoorn [36] conducted 25 and 50 m sprint times outside of the competition, used to monitor pre- and post-training effects of the POP training device on swimming performance. During these tests, significant reductions in the number of strokes taken were recorded in the resistance-training group: 25 m, 19 ± 2.3 to 18.6 ± 2; and 50 m, 46.4 ± 3.7 to 44.9 ± 3.9. By contrast, Tanaka et al. [16] found that an increase in resistance-training performance did not result in an increase in stroke length and found no significant improvement in swimming performance. Tanaka et al. [16] found that improvements through resistance training did not transfer to propulsive forces needed for an increase in stroke length. The resistance-training group increased strength by 25-35%, but no transfer to swimming performance was found. This may have been due to the hypertrophic nature of this intervention (Table 2). Dragunas et al. [35] found a significant increase in stroke length but no increase in swimming performance, similar to the above. While these results are inconclusive, they suggest that low repetitions with high velocity/force are needed for improving stroke length when prescribing resistancetraining exercises. This may be because increasing stroke length demands higher strength levels, as evidenced by Toussaint and Vervoorn [36].

## 5.3 Stroke Rate

Using stepwise regression analysis, Girold et al. [2] found stroke rate to be an important factor in increasing swimming performance over 100 m. This study showed that resisted swims caused the swimmer to increase his/her

<!-- image -->

Table 3 Summary of units and methods used to calculate stroke length and stroke rate

| References                                         | Stroke length                   | Stroke length                                                                                                                                                                                                           | Stroke rate                         | Stroke rate                                                                                                                                                                            |
|----------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| References                                         | Units                           | Method                                                                                                                                                                                                                  | Units                               | Method                                                                                                                                                                                 |
| Biokinetic swim-bench training                     | Biokinetic swim-bench training  | Biokinetic swim-bench training                                                                                                                                                                                          | Biokinetic swim-bench training      | Biokinetic swim-bench training                                                                                                                                                         |
| Roberts et al. [28]                                | NR                              | Method NR                                                                                                                                                                                                               | Cycle.min - 1                       | Time taken to perform five stroke cycles per minute                                                                                                                                    |
| Traditional resistance training                    | Traditional resistance training | Traditional resistance training                                                                                                                                                                                         | Traditional resistance training     | Traditional resistance training                                                                                                                                                        |
| Girold et al. [32]                                 | Metres                          | All 50 m trials were recorded using a video recorder. Stroke length was analysed using the video software, in 10 m segments. The mean of the total number of stroke cycles per 50 m was used to calculate stroke length | Cycle.min - 1                       | All 50 m trials were recorded using a video recorder. Three complete stroke cycles per each 25 m, from a 10 m segment. The mean of the total number of stroke cycles per 50 m was used |
| Strass [31]                                        | Metres                          | Stroke length was calculated from the following equation: velocity = stroke length 9 stroke frequency/60                                                                                                                | Cycle.min - 1                       | Stroke frequency was calculated using a stopwatch that was calibrated over four stroke cycles                                                                                          |
| Aspenes et al. [7]                                 | Metres                          | Calculated by using a speedometer by attaching a line to the swimmer and analysing the data. Stroke length was calculated when the right hand entered the water                                                         | Hertz                               | Calculated using a speedometer by attaching a line to the swimmer and analysing the data. Stroke rate was calculated when the right hand entered the water                             |
| Girold et al. [18]                                 | Metres                          | All 50 m trials were video recorded and measured with picture digitiser software. Stroke length over 10 m, every 25 mbetween 7.5 and 17.5 m                                                                             | Cycle.min - 1                       | All 50 m trials video recorded and measured with picture digitiser software. Three complete stroke cycles, over 10 m, every 25 m between 7.5 and 17.5 m                                |
| Trappe and Pearson [19]                            | Metres                          | The following equation was used: velocity = stroke length 9 stroke frequency/ 60                                                                                                                                        | Time to complete four stroke cycles | Recorded during the last 83.6 m of the 91.4 m race. Calculated by the time it took to complete four stroke cycles and divided by 4                                                     |
| Tanaka et al. [16]                                 | Metres                          | The following equation was used: velocity = stroke length 9 stroke frequency/ 60                                                                                                                                        | NR                                  | During the 365.8 m swim, stroke rate was calculated by the time taken for four complete stroke cycles at three time points                                                             |
| Manning et al. [30]                                | Not recorded                    | Not recorded                                                                                                                                                                                                            | Not recorded                        | Not recorded                                                                                                                                                                           |
| Song et al. [29]                                   | Not recorded                    | Not recorded                                                                                                                                                                                                            | Not recorded                        | Not recorded                                                                                                                                                                           |
| Core training                                      | Core training                   | Core training                                                                                                                                                                                                           | Core training                       | Core training                                                                                                                                                                          |
| Weston et al. [33] Swim-specific Girold et al. [2] | Not recorded resistance Metres  | Not recorded training The following equation was used: velocity = stroke length 9 stroke frequency/                                                                                                                     | Not recorded Cycle.min - 1          | Not recorded Stroke rate was calculated for three stroke cycles, and was measured every 25 m                                                                                           |
| Konstantaki et al. [34]                            | Not recorded                    | Not recorded                                                                                                                                                                                                            | Not recorded                        | Not recorded                                                                                                                                                                           |
| Dragunas et al. [35]                               | Metres                          | An average distance per stroke was taken from 20 to 30 and 35 to 45 each 50 m, using a video performance device, and distance per stroke was then calculated                                                            | Strokes.min -                       | An average stroke rate was taken from 20 to 30 m and 35 to 45 m each 50 m, using a video performance device, and stroke rate was then calculated                                       |
| Toussaint and Vervoorn [36]                        | Not recorded                    | Not recorded                                                                                                                                                                                                            | Not recorded                        | Not recorded                                                                                                                                                                           |

NR not reported

stroke rate, providing sufficient propulsive forces to move forward rather than being pulled back by the resisted band. The fact that an increase in stroke rate was only observed in the second half of the 100 m test trial suggests an increase in muscular strength endurance due to the resisted swims. Theoretical analyses show that stroke rate is the primary factor determining swimming performance at higher swimming velocities [68]. By contrast, Roberts et al. [28] and Aspenes et al. [7] found a decrease in stroke rate, along with a non-significant [7, 28] increase in stroke length. This suggests that by increasing stroke length there may be a decrease in stroke rate, and by increasing stroke rate there may be a decrease in stroke length. This is not uncommon as Girold et al. [2] found a significant decrease in stroke length with a significant increase in stroke rate. At maximum velocity, stroke rate is the most significant factor [3, 18, 67]; however, as race distance increases to C 400 m, stroke rate becomes less of a determining factor [75-77], but will increase due to a decrease in stroke length at volitional exhaustion [1, 77-80], with the fastest swimmers maintaining stroke length [20, 64, 67, 76]. Therefore, an individualised combination of stroke rate and stroke length needs to be established to ensure optimal performance, but for now there is no evidence to support this.

<!-- image -->

## 6 Concurrent Training

The complex nature of high-performance swimming training requires a large volume of swimming training with the complementary aid of resistance training. This simultaneous integration of resistance and swimming training within a periodised training programme is known as concurrent training [81, 82]. Swimming training includes both a low-intensity endurance training (LIT) component (increases mitochondrial density, oxidative capacity of muscle fibres, alterations in substrate metabolism and therefore the athlete's aerobic capacity [83]) and a high-intensity endurance training (HIT) component (improves delivery of oxygen to working muscles through increased stroke volume, improved heat tolerance, improved ability to produce and utilise adenosine triphosphate (ATP), improved glycogenolytic capacity and increased buffering capacity [84]). This provides the essential physiological adaptations needed to improve swimming performance. Regardless of the positive benefits of LIT, HIT and resistance training, it has been well-documented that concurrent training results in conflicting adaptation responses [81, 82, 85].

Molecular physiologists refer to myofibrillar hypertrophy as the sole adaptation to resistance training within the current literature, and do not acknowledge other neural adaptations that contribute to the increased rate of force production (i.e. musculotendinous stiffness, motor unit recruitment, and intermuscular and intramuscular coordination) [86]. Conversely, in this review, neural adaptations have been found to be primarily responsible for an increase in swimming performance. Mammalian target of rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1) has been identified as a key molecular pathway for resistance training that increases mechanical stimuli, growth factors and nutrients to promote protein synthesis. Adenosine monophosphate-activated protein kinase (AMPK) and calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II (CaMKII) are activated by endurance training and promote intracellular concentrations of Ca 2 ? , oxygen, lactate and other physiological responses to coordinate mitochondrial biogenesis, improved substrate utilisation and capillary density to enhance oxidative capacities [85]. It is believed that endurance training inhibits mTORC1 and other regulators of muscle hypertrophy, with HIT interfering with the key molecular pathways associated with resistance training more than LIT. HIT may compromise force and power production during resistance training and theoretically limit the activation of type II muscle fibres and units [87], thereby causing increased residual fatigue. Endurance training inhibits protein synthesis and stimulates protein breakdown, which limits muscle hypertrophy by affecting the positive net balance of protein synthesis needed for hypertrophy to take place [88]. AMPK has a direct inhibitory effect on mTORC1 and therefore negatively regulates protein synthesis and upregulates protein degradation [89], with sirtuin 1 (SIRT1) emerging as another potential mechanism by which mTORC1 and protein synthesis may be suppressed [90]. Conversely, some studies have shown that both protein synthesis [91] and mTORC1 signalling [92] are not affected by resistance training, with some studies showing that concurrent training improves adaptations [93]. Wilson et al. [82] hypothetically stated that greater hypertrophy can be observed in concurrent training studies when resistance and endurance training were performed on separate days. Lundberg et al. [94] found that significant time between sessions resulted in elevated metabolic signalling. Botonis et al. [95] reported similar results in waterpolo players, finding that resistance training and endurance training conducted on separate days resulted in improvements in both strength and swimming performance. These studies show that LIT has little, or any, effect on resistancetraining adaptations. Other factors that modulate the molecular responses to resistance training include training status, age, genetic factors, muscle phenotype [96, 97], training modalities and nutrient availability [85].

The current research shows conflicting results as molecular signals produced from endurance training have been shown to interfere with hypertrophic-related resistance-training adaptations; however, significant time periods and specific training modalities show favourable results. Baar [98] provides a series of scientific-based recommendations to optimise concurrent training, as follows: (1) endurance training should be performed in the morning, with at least 3 h between endurance and resistance training to allow AMPK and SIRT1 levels to return to baseline; (2) resistance training should be followed by a leucine-rich protein source to promote protein synthesis; (3) athletes should fully refuel after endurance training as AMPK can be activated by low glycogen levels and SIRT1 is activated by caloric restriction, which will affect adaptation responses to resistance training; and (4) it is optimal to perform resistance training after LIT rather than HIT. Future research should focus on the interference of endurance training on resistance training in relation to neural adaptations, rather than just myofibrillar hypertrophic adaptations.

<!-- image -->

## 7 Conclusions

The current literature shows that resistance training can improve swimming performance in response to various types of resistance-training programmes. The dynamic correspondence theory [12] provides a practical set of guidelines for designing a resistance-training programme for swimming. This theory outlines that (1) joint angular ranges should be similar; (2) weaknesses within the system should be highlighted and improved; (3) overload is essential (i.e. move moderate loads at high velocities or high loads at similar velocities specific to swimming); (4) resistance training should be specific to the time frame of swimming events; (5) resistance training should be specific to the contractions performed (i.e. concentric, eccentric, isometric, etc.); and (6) exposure to complex interactions such as multi-joint movement patterns should be similar to movement patterns performed in swimming. Further to the points above, Aspenes et al. [7] stated that technical swimming post-resistance training will help the likelihood of the transfer of resistance training to swimming performance.

The findings of this review are as follows: for optimal transfer, low-volume, high-velocity/force, swim-specific resistance-training programmes showed a positive transfer to swimming performance, with the lack of transfer from arms-only swimming and the biokinetic swim bench due to the isolation of the arms, suggesting that core training may have a significant role to play in swimming performance due to weaknesses within the system. In relation to the effect of resistance-training modalities to technical parameters, the literature is sparse and inconclusive but trends show that for improving stroke length, low-volume, high-velocity/force training is required due to increasing stroke length demanding a high level of strength. Resisted swims could present a viable training modality for increasing stroke rate, as shown by Girold et al. [2]. We have also suggested that landmark registration is a reliable and valid method to avoid stroke length and stroke rate inconsistencies within the data. Identification of suitable strength tests for swimmers requires further investigation as a gold-standard test has yet to be documented in the current literature. Use of the isokinetic machine and tethered swims seems to correlate well, both with an increase in strength of the arm extensors in the concentric condition and with swimming performance, respectively. It is therefore clear that the development of a wide range of functional resistance modalities will facilitate the transfer of resistance training to swimming performance.

<!-- image -->

The lack of high-quality methodological studies using elite swimmers makes the literature hard to interpret. It is important to note that a thorough documentation of methods and results is crucial for accurate interpretations. Specific attention should be given to intervention duration, use of effect sizes, timing systems and pool size used as these can have an effect on outcome measures. Some studies outside the scope of this review documented their training interventions in a clear and concise manner [48, 49, 57] and this is needed for studies of this nature. Future research needs to focus on long-term intervention periods, with full documentation of swimming training programmes and periodisation plans, and use of the dynamic correspondence theory [12], to provide a practical set of guidelines for designing the resistance-training intervention.

## Compliance with Ethical Standards

Funding No sources of funding were used to assist in the preparation of this article.

Conflicts of interest Emmet Crowley, Andrew J. Harrison and Mark Lyons declare that they have no conflicts of interest relevant to the content of this review.

## References

1. Wakayoshi K, D'Acquisto J, Cappaert J, et al. Relationship between metabolic parameters and stroking technique characteristics in front crawl. In: Troup JP, Hollander AP, Strasse D, Trappe SW, Cappaert JM, Trappe TA, editors. Biomechanics and medicine in swimming VII. London: Taylor &amp; Francis; 1996. p. 152-8.
2. Girold S, Calmels P, Maurin D, et al. Assisted and resisted sprint training in swimming. J Strength Cond Res. 2006;20(3):547-54.
3. Wakayoshi K, D'Acquisto L, Cappaert J, et al. Relationship between oxygen uptake, stroke rate and swimming velocity in competitive swimming. Int J Sports Med. 1995;16(01):19-23.
4. Gonza ´lez-Boto R, Salguero A, Tuero C, et al. Monitoring the effects of training load changes on stress and recovery in swimmers. J Physiol Biochem. 2008;64(1):19-26.
5. Aspenes ST, Karlsen T. Exercise-training intervention studies in competitive swimming. Sports Med. 2012;42(6):527-43.
6. Morouc ¸o PG, Marinho DA, Amaro NM, et al. Effects of dry-land strength training on swimming performance: a brief review. J Hum Sport Exerc. 2012;7(2):553-9.
7. Aspenes S, Kjendlie P-L, Hoff J, et al. Combined strength and endurance training in competitive swimmers. J Sport Sci Med. 2009;8(3):357-65.

## Author's personal copy

8. Garrido N, Marinho DA, Reis VM, et al. Does combined dry land strength and aerobic training inhibit performance of young competitive swimmers. J Sport Sci Med. 2010;9(2):300-10.
9. Saltin B, Gollnick P. Skeletal muscle adaptability: significance for metabolism and performance. In: Peachey LD, Adrain RH, Geiger SR, editors. Handbook of Physiology. Baltimore: Williams and Wilkins; 1983. p. 555-631.
10. Newton RU, Cormie P, Cardinale M. Principles of athletic training. In: Cardinale M, Newton R, Nosaka K, editors. Strength and conditioning: biological principles and practical applications. Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell; 2011. p. 255-70.
11. Haff GG, Nimphius S. Training principles for power. J Strength Cond Res. 2012;34(6):2-12.
12. Goodwin JE, Cleather DJ. The biomechanical principles underpinning strength and conditioning. In: Jefferys I, Moody J, editors. Strength and conditioning for sports performance. Oxon: Routledge; 2016. p. 62-5.
13. Suchomel TJ, Nimphius S, Stone MH. The importance of muscular strength in athletic performance. Sports Med. 2016;46(10):1-31.
14. Sharp RL, Troup JP, Costill DL. Relationship between power and sprint freestyle swimming. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 1981;14(1):53-6.
15. Costill D, Rayfield F, Kirwan J, et al. A computer based system for the measurement of force and power during front crawl swimming. J Swim Res. 1986;2(1):16-9.
16. Tanaka H, Costill DL, Thomas R, et al. Dry-land resistance training for competitive swimming. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 1993;25(8):952-9.
17. Tanaka H, Swensen T. Impact of resistance training on endurance performance. Sports Med. 1998;25(3):191-200.
18. Girold S, Maurin D, Dugue ´ B, et al. Effects of dry-land vs. resisted-and assisted-sprint exercises on swimming sprint performances. J Strength Cond Res. 2007;21(2):599-605.
19. Trappe SW, Pearson DR. Effects of weight assisted dry-land strength training on swimming performance. J Strength Cond Res. 1994;8(4):209-13.
20. Smith DJ, Norris SR, Hogg JM. Performance evaluation of swimmers. Sports Med. 2002;32(9):539-54.
21. Toussaint HM, Beek PJ. Biomechanics of competitive front crawl swimming. Sports Med. 1992;13(1):8-24.
22. Hollander AP, de Groot G, van Ingen Schenau GJ, et al. Contribution of the legs to propulsion in front crawl swimming. In: Ungerechts BE, Wilke K, Reischle K, editors. Swimming science V. International Series of Sport Sciences, vol. 18. Champaign: Human Kinetics; 1988. p. 39-44.
23. Bucher W. The influence of the leg kick and the arm stroke on the total speed during the crawl stroke. In: Lewillie L, Clarys JP, editors. Swimming II. Balitimore: University Park Press; 1975. p. 180-7.
24. Deschodt V, Arsac L, Rouard A. Relative contribution of arms and legs in humans to propulsion in 25-m sprint front-crawl swimming. Eur J Appl Physiol Occup Physiol. 1999;80(3):192-9.
25. Zamparo P, Pendergast D, Mollendorf J, et al. An energy balance of front crawl. Eur J Appl Physiol. 2005;94(1-2):134-44.
26. Moher D, Liberati A, Tetzlaff J, et al. Preferred reporting items for systematic reviews and meta-analyses: the PRISMA statement. Ann Intern Med. 2009;151(4):264-9.
27. Maher CG, Sherrington C, Herbert RD, et al. Reliability of the PEDro scale for rating quality of randomized controlled trials. Phys Ther. 2003;83(8):713-21.
28. Roberts AJ, Termin B, Reilly M, et al. Effectiveness of biokinetic training on swimming performance in collegiate swimmers. J Swim Res. 1991;7(3):5-11.
29. Song H-S, Park D-H, Jung D-S. The effect of periodized strength training application on the Korea national team. Int J Appl Sports Sci. 2009;21(2):122-45.
30. Manning J, Dooly-Manning C, Terrell D, et al. Effects of a power circuit weight training programme on power production and performance. J Swim Res. 1986;2(1):24-9.
31. Strass D. Effects of maximal strength training on sprint performance of competitive swimmers. In: Ungerechts B, Wilke K, Reischle K, editors. Swimming science. V International Series on Sport Sciences, vol. 18. Champaign: Human Kinetics; 1988. p. 149-56.
32. Girold S, Jalab C, Bernard O, et al. Dry-land strength training vs. electrical stimulation in sprint swimming performance. J Strength Cond Res. 2012;26(2):497-505.
33. Weston M, Hibbs AE, Thompson KG. Isolated core training improves sprint performance in national-level junior swimmers. Int J Sports Physiol Perform. 2015;10(2):204-10.
34. Konstantaki M, Winter E, Swaine I. Effects of arms-only swimming training on performance, movement economy, and aerobic power. Int J Sports Physiol Perform. 2008;3(3):294-304.
35. Dragunas AJ, Dickey JP, Nolte VW. The effect of drag suit training on 50-m freestyle performance. J Strength Cond Res. 2012;26(4):989-94.
36. Toussaint HM, Vervoorn K. Effects of specific high resistance training in the water on competitive swimmers. Int J Sports Med. 1990;11(03):228-33.
37. Fry AC, Kraemer WJ. Physical performance characteristics of American collegiate football players. J Strength Cond Res. 1991;5(3):126-38.
38. Hetzler RK, Stickley CD, Lundquist KM, et al. Reliability and accuracy of handheld stopwatches compared with electronic timing in measuring sprint performance. J Strength Cond Res. 2008;22(6):1969-76.
39. Pichon F, Chatard J-C, Martin A, et al. Electrical stimulation and swimming performance. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 1995;27(12):1671-6.
40. Maglischo E, Maglischo C, Zier D, et al. The effect of sprintassisted and sprint-resisted swimming on stroke mechanics. J Swim Res. 1985;1(2):27-33.
41. McGuigan MR, Winchester JB. The relationship between isometric and dynamic strength in college football players. J Sports Sci Med. 2008;7(1):101-5.
42. Bollens E, Annemans L, Vaes W, et al. Peripheral EMG comparison between fully tethered and free front crawl swimming. In: Ungerechts B, Wilke K, Reischle K, editors. Swimming science V. International Series of Sport Sciences, vol. 18. Champaign: Human Kinetics; 1988. p. 173-81.
43. Morouc ¸o P, Keskinen KL, Vilas-Boas JP, et al. Relationship between tethered forces and the four swimming techniques performance. J Appl Biomech. 2011;27(2):161-9.
44. Shimonagata S, Taguchi M, Miura M. Effect of swimming power, swimming power endurance and dry-land power on 100 m freestyle performance. In: Chatard JC, editor. Biomechanics and medicine in swimming IX. Saint Etienne: University of SaintEtienne; 2003. pp. 391-6.
45. Clarys J. Hydrodynamics and electromyography: ergonomics aspects in aquatics. Appl Ergon. 1985;16(1):11-24.
46. Coyle EF, Feiring DC, Rotkis TC, et al. Specificity of power improvements through slow and fast isokinetic training. Appl Physiol. 1981;51:1437-42.
47. Kanehisa H, Miyashita M. Specificty of velocity in strength training. Euro J Appl Physiol. 1983;52:104-6.
48. Sadowski J, Mastalerz A, Gromisz W, et al. Effectiveness of the power dry-land training programmes in youth swimmers. J Hum Kinet. 2012;32:77-86.

<!-- image -->

49. Ramos Veliz R, Requena B, Suarez-Arrones L, et al. Effects of 18-week in-season heavy-resistance and power training on throwing velocity, strength, jumping, and maximal sprint swim performance of elite male water polo players. J Strength Cond Res. 2014;28(4):1007-14.
50. Gollnick PD. Relationship of strength and endurance with skeletal muscle structure and metabolic potential. Int J Sports Med. 1982;3:26-32.
51. Dingley AA, Pyne DB, Youngson J, et al. Effectiveness of a dryland resistance training programme on strength, power, and swimming performance in paralympic swimmers. J Strength Cond Res. 2015;29(3):619-26.
52. Stewart AM, Hopkins WG. Seasonal training and performance of competitive swimmers. J Sports Sci. 2000;18(11):873-84.
53. Costill D. Training adaptations for optimal performance. In: Keskinen KL, Komi PV, Hollander AP, editors. Biomechanics and medicine in swimming VIII. Jyva ¨skyla ¨: University of Jyva ¨skyla ¨; 1999. p. 381-90.
54. Delecluse C, Van Coppenolle H, Willems E, et al. Influence of high resistance and high velocity training on sprint performance. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 1995;27:1203-9.
55. Maglischo EW, Maglischo CW, Zier DJ, et al. The effect of sprint-assisted and sprint-ressisted swimming on stroke mechanics. J Swimming Res. 1985;1:27-33.
56. Jua ´rez Santos-Garcı ´a D, Gonza ´lez-Rave ´ JM, Legaz Arrese A, et al. Acute effects of two resisted exercises on 25 m swimming performance. Isokinet Exerc Sci. 2013;21(1):29-35.
57. De Villarreal ES, Suarez-Arrones L, Requena B, et al. Enhancing performance in professional water polo players: dryland training, in-water training, and combined training. J Strength Cond Res. 2015;29(4):1089-97.
58. Ribeiro J, Figueiredo P, Sousa A, et al. \_ VO2 kinetics and metabolic contributions during full and upper body extreme swimming intensity. Eur J Appl Physiol. 2015;115(5):1117-24.
59. Rodrı ´guez F, La ¨tt E, Ju ¨rima ¨e J, et al. VO 2 kinetics in all-out arm stroke, leg kick and whole stroke front crawl 100-m swimming. Int J Sports Med. 2016;37(03):191-6.
60. Morris KS, Osborne MA, Shephard ME, et al. Velocity, aerobic power and metabolic cost of whole body and arms only front crawl swimming at various stroke rates. Eur J Appl Physiol. 2016;116(5):1075-85.
61. McGowan CJ, Pyne DB, Raglin JS, et al. Current warm-up practices and contemporary issues faced by elite swimming coaches. J Strength Cond Res. 2016;30(12):3471-80.
62. Telles T, Barbosa AC, Campos MH, et al. Effect of hand paddles and parachute on the index of coordination of competitive crawlstrokers. J Sports Sci. 2011;29(4):431-8.
63. Clarys JP, Toussaint HM, Bollens E, et al. Muscular specificity and intensity in swimming against a mechanical resistance: surface EMG in MAD-and free swimming. In: Ungerechts BE, Reischle K, Wilke K, editors. Swimming V. Champaign: Human Kinetics; 1988. p. 191-9.
64. Figueiredo P, Zamparo P, Sousa A, et al. An energy balance of the 200 m front crawl race. Eur J Appl Physiol. 2011;111(5):767-77.
65. Chatard JC, Mujika I. Training load and performance in swimming. In: Keskinen KL, Komi PV, Hollander AP, editors. Biomechanics and medicine in swimming VIII. Jyva ¨skyla ¨: University of Jyva ¨skyla ¨; 1999. p. 429-34
66. Costill D, Sharp R, Troup J. Muscle strength: contributions to sprint swimming. Swim World. 1980;21:29-34.
67. Craig AB, Skehan PL, Pawelczyk JA, et al. Velocity, stroke rate, and distance per stroke during elite swimming competition. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 1985;17(6):625-34.
68. Hay J, Guimaraes A, Grimston S. A quantitative look at swimming biomechanics. Swimming Technique. 1983;20(2):11-7.
69. Craig AB, Pendergast DR. Relationships of stroke rate, distance per stroke, and velocity in competitive swimming. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 1979;11:278-83.
70. Schnitzler C, Seifert L, Chollet D. Arm coordination and performance level in the 400-m front crawl. Res Q Exerc Sport. 2011;82(1):1-8.
71. Laffite LP, Vilas-Boas JP, Demarle A, et al. Changes in physiological and stroke parameters during a maximal 400-m free swimming test in elite swimmers. Can J Appl Physiol. 2004;29(1):17-31.
72. Alberty M, Potdevin F, Dekerle J, et al. Changes in swimming technique during time to exhaustion at freely chosen and controlled stroke rates. J Sports Sci. 2008;26(11):1191-200.
73. Huot-Marchand F, Nesi X, Sidney M, et al. Is improvement in performance linked to higher stroke length values in top-level 100-m front crawl swimmers? J Hum Mov Stud. 2005;6(1):12-8.
74. Deluzio KJ, Harrison AJ, Coffey N, et al. Analysis of biomechnical waveform data. In: Robertson DGE, Caldwell GE, Hamill J, Kamen G, Whittlesey SN, editors. Research methods in biomechanics. 2nd ed. Champaign: Human Kinetics; 2014. p. 317-37.
75. Fernandes RJ, Marinho DA, Barbosa TM, et al. Is time limit at the minimum swimming velocity of VO2 max influenced by stroking parameters? Percept Mot Skills. 2006;103(1):67-75.
76. Laffite LP, Vilas-Boas JP, Demarle A, et al. Changes in physiological and stroke parameters during a maximal 400-m free swimming test in elite swimmers. Can J Appl Physiol. 2004;29(S1):S17-31.
77. Alberty M, Sidney M, Pelayo P, et al. Stroking characteristics during time to exhaustion tests. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2009;41(3):637.
78. Marinho DA, Boas JPV, Keskinen KL, et al. Behaviour of the kinematic parameters during a time to exhaustion test at VO2max in elite swimmers. J Hum Movement Stud. 2006;51:1-10.
79. Keskinen KL, Komi PV. Stroking characteristics of front crawl swimming during exercise. J Appl Biomech. 1993;9(3):219-26.
80. Fernandes R, Vilas-Boas J. Time to exhaustion at the VO2max velocity in swimming: a review. J Hum Kinet. 2012;32:121-34.
81. Leveritt M, Abernethy PJ, Barry BK, et al. Concurrent strength and endurance training. A review. Sports Med. 1999;28(6):413-27.
82. Wilson JM, Marin PJ, Rhea MR, et al. Concurrent training: a meta-analysis examining interference of aerobic and resistance exercises. J Strength Cond Res. 2012;26(8):2293-307.
83. Hawley JA. Adaptations of skeletal muscle to prolonged, intense endurance training. Clin Exp Pharmacol Physiol. 2002;29(3):218-22.
84. Laursen PB, Jenkins DG. The scientific basis for high-intensity interval training. Sports Med. 2002;32(1):53-73.
85. Fyfe JJ, Bishop DJ, Stepto NK. Interference between concurrent resistance and endurance exercise: molecular bases and the role of individual training variables. Sports Med. 2014;44(6):743-62.
86. Cormie P, McGuigan MR, Newton RU. Developing maximal neuromuscular power. Sports Med. 2011;41(1):17-38.
87. Sale DG. Influence of exercise and training on motor unit activation. Exerc Sport Sci Rev. 1987;15:95-151.
88. Hawley JA. Molecular responses to strength and endurance training: are they incompatible? Appl Physiol Nutr Metab. 2009;34(3):355-61.
89. Coffey VG, Hawley JA. The molecular bases of training adaptation. Sports Med. 2007;37(9):737-63.
90. Ghosh HS, McBurney M, Robbins PD. SIRT1 negatively regulates the mammalian target of rapamycin. PLoS One. 2010;5(2):e9199.
91. Donges CE, Burd NA, Duffield R, et al. Concurrent resistance and aerobic exercise stimulates both myofibrillar and

<!-- image -->

## Author's personal copy

- mitochondrial protein synthesis in sedentary middle-aged men. J Appl Physiol. 2012;112(12):1992-2001.
92. Apro W, Wang L, Ponten M, et al. Resistance exercise induced mTORC1 signalling is not impaired by subsequent endurance exercise in human skeletal muscle. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2013;305:22-32.
93. Wang L, Mascher H, Psilander N, et al. Resistance exercise enhances the molecular signalling of mitochondrial biogenesis induced by endurance exercise in human skeletal muscle. J Appl Physiol. 2011;111(5):1335-44.
94. Lundberg TR, Fernandez-Gonzalo R, Gustafsson T, et al. Aerobic exercise alters skeletal muscle molecular responses to resistance exercise. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2012;44(9):1680-8.
95. Botonis PG, Toubekis AG, Platanou TI. Concurrent strength and interval endurance training in elite water polo players. J Strength Cond Res. 2016;30(1):126-33.
96. Coffey VG, Shield A, Canny BJ, et al. Interaction of contractile activity and training history on mRNA abundance in skeletal muscle from trained athletes. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2006;290(5):E849-55.
97. Coffey VG, Zhong Z, Shield A, et al. Early signalling responses to divergent exercise stimuli in skeletal muscle from well-trained humans. FASEB J. 2006;20(1):190-2.
98. Baar K. Using molecular biology to maximize concurrent training. Sports Med. 2014;44(2):117-25.

<!-- image -->