## The Effects of Strength and Conditioning Interventions on Sprinting Performance in Team Sport Athletes: A Systematic Review and MetaAnalysis

Andrew Murphy, Katherine Burgess, Andy J. Hall, Rodrigo R. Aspe, and Paul A. Swinton

School of Health Sciences, Robert Gordon University, Aberdeen, United Kingdom

## Abstract

Murphy, A, Burgess, K, Hall, AJ, Aspe, RR, and Swinton, PA. The effects of strength and conditioning interventions on sprinting performance in team sport athletes: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Strength Cond Res 37(8): 1692-1702, 2023-Linear sprinting is a key determinant of athletic performance within team sports. The aims of the review were to quantify and compare the effectiveness of popular strength and conditioning (S&amp;C) training modes to improve sprint performance in team sport athletes, with additional focus on potential moderators and the relationships between improvements in physical factors (e.g., strength, power, and jump performance) and improvements in sprint performance. Inclusion was restricted to resistance, plyometric, sprint, and combined training interventions comprising team sport athletes. Multilevel, Bayesian's meta-analysis and meta-regression models conducted with standardized mean difference effect sizes were used to investigate training modes and potential moderators. Weighted regression models conducted on shrunken estimates from initial Bayesian's meta-analyses were used to quantify relationships between improvements in physical factors and sprint performance. Certainty of evidence was assessed using the grading of recommendations assessment development and evaluation (GRADE) approach. Similar improvements in sprint performance were obtained across training modes, with some evidence of the largest effects with resistance training (SMDPre 0 : 5 5 0.55 [95% credible interval [CrI]: 0.36-0.78; very low certainty]). A strong moderating effect of training intensity was identified across all training modes with evidence of greater improvements in sprint performance with high-intensity training ( b Low : High 0 : 5 5 0.17 [95% CrI: 0.01-0.33; very low certainty]). Strong positive relationships were identified between improvements in all physical factors and sprint performance ( b Strength 0 : 5 5 0.56 [95% CrI: 0.36-0.77; low certainty], b Power 0 : 5 5 0.80 [95% CrI: 0.50-1.0; low certainty], b Jump 0 : 5 5 0.78 [95% CrI: 0.57-0.97; low certainty]). The findings indicate that focus on developing speed in team sport athletes should be placed on S&amp;C training with high intensities, including the use of resisted sprint training.

Key Words: S&amp;C, power, specificity, transfer, Bayesian

## Introduction

Strength and conditioning (S&amp;C) is frequently used with athletes to enhance athletic performance and reduce injury risk. Research has consistently demonstrated that engagement in S&amp;C training modes such as resistance exercise increases the ability to express force and power during resisted movements (34,61,63). However, the ability to improve athletic performance is also dependent on the magnitude of transfer between training adaptations and desired performance outcomes (9). Long-term performance adaptations and the transfer of training are dependent on the principles of overload and specificity (30,60,63), with the magnitude of adaptations influenced primarily by overload and the amount of transfer influenced primarily by the degree of specificity with target outcomes. The principle of specificity generally considers the kinematic and kinetic similarities between S&amp;C training and the targeted sporting outcomes and actions (7,33). For example, resisted sprint training comprises a high degree of specificity with sprint performance and is frequently referred to in this context as a ' direct training ' method. By contrast, traditional resistance training comprises low specificity regarding sprint performance and can therefore be considered in this context an ' indirect training ' method.

Address correspondence to Dr. Paul A. Swinton, p.swinton@rgu.ac.uk.

Supplemental digital content is available for this article. Direct URL citations appear in the printed text and are provided in the HTML and PDF versions of this article on the journal's Web site (http://journals.lww.com/nsca-jscr).

Journal of Strength and Conditioning Research 37(8)/1692-1702

ª

2023 National Strength and Conditioning Association

It has been identified that overload and specificity can be conflicting with greater overload of an exercise reducing specificity and vice versa (7). Multiple theoretical models have been developed by practitioners to describe transfer of training; however, research has predominantly focused on empirical models quantifying correlations between sporting actions and kinematic and kinetic variables collected during performance of S&amp;C exercises (16,48,68,69). Frequently this correlational research has included athletes participating in team sport where actions such as linear sprinting are performed regularly and have been shown to be a key determinant of athletic performance (18,23,31,32,36,39). Correlational research conducted specifically with team sport athletes had consistently demonstrated that lower-body maximum strength and power output scaled relative to body mass produced moderate to strong correlations with sprinting performance (3,17,41,62,70). Baker and Nance (3) and McBride et al. (41) reported comparable correlations between scaled lower-body strength and 10- and 40-m sprint performance. Conversely, more recent studies from Cunningham et al. (17) and Furlong et al. (21) reported low and nonsignificant correlations between relative strength and maximum velocity sprinting over 30 m. However, the authors did report moderate to strong correlations between measures of jump height, reactive strength index, lower-limb stiffness, and maximum velocity sprinting. These more recent results suggest that relationships between measures of physical capacity and sprinting may be different through the acceleration and maximum velocity phases.

Maximum effort sprinting commonly occurs over short distances ( , 30 m) and durations (2 -3 seconds) in team sports; therefore, S&amp;C training and subsequent longitudinal research has emphasized the development of speed and acceleration over similar distances (8,31,59). Previous intervention studies have reported reductions in sprint times of 0.03 -0.41 seconds across a range of athletes and distances up to 40 m, with an average percentage difference of 3 -4% (2,13,14,22,23,27,37,57,58,65). Training status and mode of training have been identified as potential moderators (54,55) with researchers suggesting that more experienced athletes require training modes with high levels of specificity for continued improvement in sprinting performance (33). As a result, a range of training modes have been developed in attempts to maximize production of kinetic variables associated with sprinting performance to maximize transfer of training. The most common modes include resistance training, ballistic resistance training, plyometric training, combined training methods featuring both resistance and plyometric modes, and sprint-specific training methods (e.g., resisted, free sprinting, and assisted or overspeed). Given the broad range of training modes and the likely existence of other moderating factors including training status and specific training dose (e.g., frequency, volume, and intensity), identification of the most effective S&amp;C training interventions to improve sprinting performance remains challenging.

Multiple narrative reviews and systematic reviews combined with meta-analyses (1,4,6,15,20,29,45,46,49,53 -55) have been conducted to synthesize research investigating S&amp;C training and sprinting performance. Reviews from Bolger et al. (6) and Haugen et al. (29) focused on training methods to improve sprint performance in elite track and field sprinters. Bolger et al. (6) and Haugen et al. (29) suggested that both direct and indirect training modes may produce positive adaptations with elite sprinters; however, both reviews identified the need for further research. Using metaanalytic techniques, Rumpf et al. (53) compared effect sizes for direct and indirect training modes across a range of sprint distances in physically active team and nonteam sport athletes. The authors reported moderate to large effects on sprint performance after sprint-specific training, with resisted sprint training producing the largest effect on distances of 0 -20 m and free sprinting producing the greatest effects at distances over 31 m. By contrast, indirect training modes including resistance and plyometrics produced only small-to-moderate effects. Recently, 2 large-scale meta-analyses including 121 and 86 studies compared the effectiveness of multiple training modes on acceleration (45) and maximum velocity (46) with football code athletes competing in sports such as soccer, American football, Canadian football, Australian football, Gaelic football, and rugby. The authors concluded that combined specific and nonspecific training modes, focusing on the development of physical capacity in conjunction with high-specificity sprint training in the form of resisted sprinting, produced the largest effects during the acceleration phase. By contrast, nonspecific training methods were shown to produce the greatest improvements in maximum velocity performance within the same population.

Although recent meta-analyses have begun to provide clearer results regarding the relative effectiveness of different training modes in the development of sprint performance in team sport population, there remains limited understanding of the potential moderating role of program variables such as training intensity and volume. To the authors ' knowledge, there is no meta-analysis to date has attempted to model relationships between changes in strength and power and subsequent changes in sprint performance in team sport athletes. Given the availability of previous data and a lack of largescale modeling research investigating some of the more complex relationships between S&amp;C training and sprint performance in team sport athletes, the purpose of this systematic review and metaanalysis was to (a) synthesize and compare effect sizes of different S&amp;C training modes on sprint performance; (b) investigate the effect of potential moderators, including athlete level, training duration, frequency, intensity, and volume; and (c) investigate the relationships between improvements in standard S&amp;C training outcomes such as strength and power and improvements in sprint performance.

## Methods

## Experimental Approach to the Problem

The current systematic review and meta-analysis comprised a comprehensive synthesis quantifying effectiveness of S&amp;C training on sprinting performance of team sport athletes. Primary analyses investigated the effects of potential moderators including athlete demographics (e.g., training type and training level) and training dose parameters (e.g., frequency, volume and intensity). Secondary analyses investigated relationships between changes in standard S&amp;C training outcomes such as strength and power and improvements in sprint performance. The methods used in the systematic review adhered to an a priori protocol (63) and previously published guidelines including the checklist of Preferred Reporting items for Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis Protocols (PRISMA-P) (43), which is presented in the Supplemental Digital Content (see SF-1, http://links.lww.com/JSCR/A378). Institutional Review Board approval for this review was provided by the Robert Gordon University, UK.

## Eligibility Criteria

The PICOS (Population, Intervention, Comparator, Outcomes, and Study Design) approach was used to guide determination of eligibility criteria for this review.

Population. Healthy male and female subjects aged 16 years and older participating in a team sport at any level and of any training status were considered for inclusion in this review. Subject age was restricted to reduce any pre-post difference in sprint performance that may be because of changes in the early biological maturation status occurring during the intervention period (38,42). In addition, it has been suggested that S&amp;C interventions may become more targeted toward sport-specific outcomes (e.g., sprint performance) in later adolescence potentially through inclusion in performance academies and other high-level sporting environments (38).

Intervention. Longitudinal studies comprising S&amp;C interventions of at least 4 weeks in duration that could be categorized as an indirect or direct (definitions provided in Table 1) sprint training mode were included. A minimum duration of 4 weeks was selected because it is considered the shortest period required to elicit measurable adaptations from S&amp;C training interventions andconsidered a common unit of time to describe a single training block (5,50). Lower-body strength and power are regarded as important factors in determining sprint performance of team sport athletes (62), and therefore, inclusion was restricted to interventions that targeted development of the gluteus, quadriceps, hamstrings, gastrocnemius, and soleus.

| Table 1 Definitions of indirect and direct training modes used for review.   | Table 1 Definitions of indirect and direct training modes used for review.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Training mode                                                                | Definition                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |
| Indirect training modes                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |
| Standard resistance                                                          | Multijoint exercise (e.g., squat or deadlift) performed on a flat, stable surface with body mass, free weights, or machines in which it is possible to replicate lower-body multijoint exercises (e.g., Smith machine and hack squat)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |
| Ballistic resistance                                                         | Exercise performed at maximum intent with the projection of an external load at moderate to high velocity (e.g., Olympic weightlifting and loaded jump squats)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               |
| Plyometric training                                                          | Exercises that use the stretch shortening cycle with rapid transition of eccentric to concentric contraction phases to produce high-velocity movements resulting in jump or bound                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |
| Direct training modes                                                        |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |
| Free sprint training                                                         | Maximum intent sprinting performed on a flat, stable surface without any external resistance or assistance                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |
| Resisted sprint training                                                     | Maximumintent sprinting performed on a stable surface against an external resistance with the use of a sled, wearable resistance, or incline with the aim to decrease maximum achievable velocity and increase kinetic output                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |
| Assisted sprint training                                                     | Maximum intent sprinting performed with assistance in the form of a pulley, towing, or body mass reduction harness with the aim to improve certain sprint kinematics, namely, achieve supramaximum velocities                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |
| Combined training modes                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |
| Combined training                                                            | Combinations of resistance, sprint, ballistic, or plyometric training. To be considered a combined training mode, the secondary mode must account for at least 30% of total lower-body training volume (number of lower-body exercises multiplied by averages number of sets completed multiplied by average number of repetitions completed will be used to calculate training volume). If indirect combined with sprint training, more than 5 1 sets must be completed, or $ 100 m in sprinting must be completed within the training week |

Comparator. Both controlled and noncontrolled study designs were included with noncontrolled effect sizes used for analyses. Where studies include comparators that did not meet inclusion criteria, only group data that matched the criteria were included.

Outcomes and Prioritization. The primary outcomes for the review included sprint time (s) and sprint velocity (m · s 2 1 ). Sprint outcomes were included across all distances, with subset analyses performed on sprint outcomes up to 40 m separated into 10-m intervals (54,55). Secondary outcomes included measures of lower-body strength and power. Measures of strength were restricted to those assessing maximum force production (e.g., Onerepetition maximum [1RM] and isometric mid-thigh pull), and measures of power included both indirect (e.g., vertical jump height) and direct assessments measured in Watts collected during performance of a lower-body resisted or nonresistance movement (e.g., leg press, squat, squat jump, or appropriate cycle ergometer assessment). These secondary outcomes were used to assess the relationship between improvements in strength and power and subsequent improvements in sprinting performance. Given the modeling focus of this review and attempts to quantitatively explore moderators and relationships among outcomes, only studies that included sufficient data, including pre-post means and standard deviations or standard errors, along with specific information of moderating factors, such as intervention intensity, volume, exercises included, and frequency, to be incorporated in meta-analyses were included.

<!-- image -->

## Search Strategy

The search strategy used for this study was part of a larger search conducted to investigate the distribution of effect sizes across most of the S&amp;C literature (63). The search was performed using Embase, Medline, Web of Science, Sport Discus, and Google Scholar. Hand searching of relevant journals, including Medicine and Science in Sports and Exercise, the Journal of Strength and Conditioning Research, and Research Quarterly, was also conducted. Database search terms were included to identify various training modes, longitudinal interventions, and a range of outcome measures. The following keywords and phrases were combined with Boolean ' s operators: ' strength ' OR ' resistance ' OR ' sprint ' OR ' plyometric ' OR ' exercise ' AND ' intervention ' OR ' training ' OR ' program ' OR ' programme ' AND ' 1RM ' OR ' repetition maximum ' OR ' speed ' OR ' velocity ' OR ' power ' OR ' jump ' OR ' change of direction ' OR ' agility ' OR ' acceleration ' OR ' rate of force development. ' No restriction was placed on the date of the study. The initial larger search was conducted in January 2018, with subsequent searches restricted to focus on acceleration, speed, and velocity outcomes made on August 2020 and May 2022.

## Study Selection

A 2-stage selection strategy (title or abstract and full-text screen) was independently undertaken by 3 members of the review team (A.M., A.J.H., and R.R.A.). The independent screeners convened at the end of each screening stage to resolve any discrepancies. During the full-text screen, reasons for exclusion were categorized as one or more of the following: (a) ineligible population, (b) ineligible intervention, (c) ineligible outcomes, (d) insufficient data, and (30) other.

## Data Extraction

Acodebookandextraction files were developed using Microsoft Excel, and prepiloted before data extraction. Data were extracted independently by 3 members of the review team (A.M., A.J.H., and R.R.A.) into separate extraction files then merged following discussion of any differences. The following data were extracted where available: study details (authors, year, total number of groups, control type), subject characteristics (final study n , sex, training status, age), exercise characteristics (type, intervention duration, frequency, intensity, volume), preintervention and postintervention data (means and SD s) collected from (a) sprint performance, (b) maximum strength (tests of lower-body strength where time was not limited, e.g., isometric mid-thigh pull), (c) power: any direct measurement of power in Watts measured during lower-body activities and measures of jump height, and (d) jump performance measured in distance. Subjects for each study were categorized on the basis of their experience with structured S&amp;C as novices ( , 1-year experience), intermediates (1 -5 years of experience), and advanced ( . 5 years of experience) (52). Interventions were categorized based on the key exercises matching the definitions outlined in Table 1. Intensity for resistance training interventions were coded as low and high based on a percentage 1RM ( # 80% low and . 80% high). Ballistic resistance training and speed training interventions were always coded as high intensity because of the maximal intent of the movements, unless a submaximal intensity was specifically stated. Where studies did not provide a percentage 1RM, the number of repetitions performed per set was used to estimate intensity based on equivalent percentages suggested by Sheppard and Triplett (56). Plyometric training intensity was based on the characteristics of the included exercises; for example, extensive pogo jumps, vertical jumps, and double leg static jump variations were generally coded as low intensity. Unilateral jumps for height or distance, repeated bounding, and drop or depth jumps . 30-cm drop height were categorized as high intensity. Training volume for resistance training interventions was categorized as low or high based on the average number of repetitions performed in the main exercises (1 -9 low and $ 10 high). The same method was applied to ballistic resistance exercise with different cutoffs (1 -6 low and . 6 high). Training volume for plyometric training was based on the average number of foot contacts performed per session ( , 120 low and $ 120 high). Categorization of speed training volume was based on the average number of total sprints performed per session ( , 10 low and $ 10 high).

## Certainty in Cumulative Evidence

Certainty in meta-analytic outcomes was assessed by R.R.A. and P.A.S. using the Grading of Recommendations Assessment Development and Evaluation (GRADE) approach (28). Potential downgrading factors included risk of bias, inconsistency, imprecision, and the presence of small-study effects. Risk of bias for each study was appraised using the PEDro scale based on the Delphi list developed by Verhagen et al. (67). A total of 2 domains were evaluated, including (34): internal validity and (61) statistical information. For noncomparator studies, the PEDro scale was modified to only include questions 8, 9, and 11. Individual studies were assigned a final risk of bias score interpreted as 8 -10 ' low risk ' (80% 1 ), 6 -7 ' moderate risk ' (60 -79%), $ 6 ' high risk ' ( $ 59%) (12). Assessment of risk of bias for meta-analytic outcomes was conducted by calculating the mode risk of bias score from the studies comprising outcomes in the analysis. Inconsistency was assessed based on metaanalysis results and comparison of central and variance parameter estimates and identified as high risk if between-study standard error was . 90%of effect size. Imprecision was judged based on the number of data points available (number of studies, treatment arms, and outcome measures) and width of credible intervals for central estimates. Certainty of evidence was categorized as high or moderate or low or very low. Assessments began with a categorization of high certainty and were downgraded one level for each of the domains that were not judged low risk.

<!-- image -->

## Data Synthesis

ABayesian ' s framework was chosen because it provides a flexible modeling approach that enables results to be interpreted intuitively through reporting of subjective probabilities (35,64). The effects of each intervention were quantified by calculating effect sizes in the form of standardized mean differences (SMDs). To account for the small sample sizes generally used in S&amp;C, a bias correction was applied. Magnitude-based SMDs obtained by dividing the mean difference by the preintervention standard deviation are the most popular form of effect size used in metaanalyses in sport and exercise science and are informative when considering the change an individual that can be expected to make relative to a population from preintervention to postintervention (11). Effect sizes were calculated for all outcomes that met the inclusion criteria with most studies providing multiple effect sizes. All relevant effect sizes were incorporated within each metaanalysis comprising a nested 4-level mixed-effects structure, which is presented in the Supplemental Digital Content (see SF-2, http://links.lww.com/JSCR/A379). The series of nestings included the individual study (level 4), the outcome (level 3, e.g., studies generally included multiple outcomes), the measurement occasion (level 2, e.g., studies frequently measured outcomes at multiple points following baseline), and the within-study sampling variance (level 1), which were calculated according to standard distributions with bias correction for small samples applied (11,19).

To investigate potential differences in effect size distributions across training modes and moderators, such as sprint distance, training dose, and training status, meta-regressions were performed with variables categorized as factors and entered into meta-analysis models as fixed effects. Meta-regressions were presented by selecting one level of the factor as a reference to make comparisons with the median and 95% credible interval (CrI) given b Reference:comparison 5 median [95% CrI: lower bound to upper bound], such that b . 0 indicates an increased effect of the comparison relative to the reference.

Meta-regressions were also performed to investigate potential associations between changes in physical capacity (strength, power, or vertical jump performance) and changes in sprint performance. First, separate meta-analyses were conducted pooling strength, power, vertical jump, or sprint performance data. For each meta-analysis, individual studies were allocated a single study-specific effect size and associated standard error. This effect size represented a ' shrunken estimate ' across all data points included in the study, borrowing strength from data across all studies and being pulled toward the pooled mean to represent more probable values. The study-specific effect size and standard error were taken from the study posterior distribution as the median and standard deviation, respectively. An illustration of study-specific posterior distributions can be seen in the Bayesian ' s forest plot in Figure 2, where the black circles represent the median and the width of the distribution reflects the standard error. A final series of weighted meta-regressions were then performed with the shrunken sprint performance estimates for the dependent variable along with their standard error, and the shrunken strength, power, or vertical jump estimates as continuous moderator values with weighting applied based on the reciprocal of their standard error. This approach was used to account for the use of different numbers of independent and dependent outcomes across studies.

Weakly informative Student ' s t priors with 3 degrees of freedom were used for intercept and slope parameters in regressions, and half Student ' s t priors with 3 degrees of freedom were used for variance parameters (26). Inferences from all analyses were performed on posterior samples generated using the Hamiltonian Markov Chain Monte Carlo method with 4 chains for 20,000 iterations with a burn-in period of 10,000. Interpretations were based on the median value (Effect size0.5: 0.5-quantile), the range within CrIs. Bayesian ' s CrIs can be interpreted probabilistically, such that with a 95% CrI, there is a 95% probability that the true (unknown) estimate would lie within the interval given the priors implemented and the evidence provided by the observed data. In addition, the ES0.5 represents the center of the posterior such that values close to this point are generally more probable. Analyses were performed using the R wrapper package brms interfaced with Stan to perform sampling (10). Convergence of parameter estimates was obtained for all models with Gelman-Rubin R-hat values below 1.1 (25).

## Results

The literature search initially identified a total of 119,642 potential studies, after removal of duplicates and title and abstract screening, 804 full articles were evaluated according to the inclusion or exclusion criteria. A total of 157 studies comprising a median group size of 11 (interquartile range [IQR]: 9 -13), met the inclusion criteria and featured sufficient data to be included in the meta-analysis (Figure 1). A full reference list of the included studies is provided in the Supplemental Digital Content (see SF-3, http://links.lww.com/JSCR/A380). A total of 1,805 outcomes were extracted (sprint time: 699; sprint velocity: 131; strength: 319; power: 229; jump: 427) from interventions categorized as resistance (34.0%), sprint (18.0%), plyometric (10.0%), and a combination of the 3 (38.0%). Most outcomes were obtained from subjects categorized as intermediates (30.4%), followed by novices (57.5%) and advanced (12.1%) based on their S&amp;C experience. A high percentage of outcomes were obtained from male-only groups (82.7%), followed by female-only (10.4%) and mixed (6.9%) groups. Measurement of outcomes was performed onaconsistent basis with a tight distribution (median: 8; IQR:6 -9 weeks). Strength of evidence assessments for the meta-analysis outcomes and risk of bias for individual studies are presented in Supplemental Digital Content (see SF-4, http://links.lww.com/ JSCR/A381 and SF-5, http://links.lww.com/JSCR/A382).

## Meta-Analysis: Sprint Outcomes

Meta-analysis of all sprint outcomes estimated a mean pooled effect size of SMDPre0 : 5 5 0.44 (95% CrI: 0.37 -0.52; very low certainty), with between-study standard deviation s v0 : 5 5 0.46 (75% CrI: 0.42 -0.50), which accounted for approximately 70% of the variance across levels (Figure 2). Analyses indicated that the mean pooled effect size for sprint outcomes measured by time or velocity were equivalent ( b Time : Velocity 0 : 5 5 0.02 [95% CrI: 2 0.09 to 0.14; very low certainty]). In addition, estimated pooled means were similar across sprint distances ( b # 10m : # 20m0 : 5 5 2 0.03 [95% CrI: 2 0.09 to 0.05; low certainty], b # 10m : # 30m0 : 5 52 0.04 [95% CrI: 2 0.14 to 0.07; low certainty], b # 10m : # 40m0 : 5 52 0.01 [95% CrI: 2 0.10 to 0.09; very low certainty]). The largest estimated mean pooled effect size was obtained for interventions comprising resistance training (SMDPre0 : 5 5 0.55 [95% CrI: 0.36 -0.78; very low certainty]); however, there was considerable overlap in estimates across all intervention types ( b Sprint : Resistance0 : 5 5 0.11 [95% CrI: 2 0.03 to 0.26; low certainty], b Sprint : Plyometric 0 : 5

<!-- image -->

5 2 0.03 [95% CrI: 2 0.21 to 0.16; low certainty], b Sprint : Combined0 5 0.07 [95% CrI: 2 0.08 to 0.20; low certainty]).

: 5 Further moderator analyses identified increased mean pooled effect size with interventions comprising high-intensity activity compared with lower-intensity activity ( b Low : High 0 : 5 5 0.17 [95% CrI: 0.01 -0.33; very low certainty]). By contrast, considerable overlap and limited evidence of moderating effects were obtained for training volume ( b Low : High 0 : 5 5 2 0.02 [95% CrI: 2 0.14 to 0.10; low certainty]), intervention length ( b , 8Weeks : $ 8Weeks0 : 5 5 0.12 [95% CrI: 0.01 -0.23; low certainty]), and subject S&amp;C training status ( b Novice : $ Intermediate0 : 5 52 0.06 [95% CrI: 2 0.18 to 0.07; low certainty], b Novice : $ Advanced0 : 5 5 0.01 [95% CrI: 2 0.24 to 0.26; low certainty]). In a subanalysis conducted on all sprint outcomes obtained from interventions categorized as free sprint or resisted sprint, an increased pooled mean effect size was estimated for resisted sprint interventions ( b Free : Resisted0 : 5 5 0.19 [95% CrI: 0.09 -0.29; moderate certainty]).

## Meta-Analysis: Relationships Between Sprint and Other Outcomes

From the 133 studies included in the review, 72 studies (54%) included 288 strength outcomes, 46 studies (34%) included 196 power outcomes, and 102 studies (76%) included 362 jump outcomes. Mean pooled effect sizes of SMDPre0 : 5 5 0.46 (95% CrI: 0.27 -0.68; low certainty), SMDPre0 : 5 5 0.47 (95% CrI: 0.36 -0.59; moderate certainty), and SMDPre0 : 5 5 0.50 (95% CrI: 0.42 -0.59; low certainty) were obtained for strength, power, and jump outcomes, respectively. To quantify relationships between magnitudes of improvement in sprint outcomes and all other outcomes, shrunken estimates from each intervention group were obtained combining all outcomes from each category into a single estimate. Relatively strong relationships were obtained between improvements in sprint and all other outcome measures ( b Strength 0 : 5 5 0.56 [95% CrI: 0.36 -0.77; low certainty], b Power0 : 5 5 0.80 [95% CrI: 0.50 -1.0; low certainty], b Jump 0 : 5 5 0.78 [95% CrI: 0.57 -0.97; low certainty]). Bubble plots illustrating the relationship between shrunken estimates across studies are presented in Figure 3.

## Discussion

This study represents one of the largest meta-analyses to date investigating the transfer of S&amp;C training to sprint performance in team sport athletes. Meta-analyses conducted across all training modes identified similar improvements in sprint performance across distances of 5 -40 m, for both time and velocity. Considerable overlap in pooled estimates were obtained for resistance, sprint, plyometric, and combined training modes, with the highest point estimate obtained for resistance training. The strongest moderating effects were identified for training intensity and intervention duration. Higher-intensity training, including the addition of resistance during sprint training, resulted in increases in standardized mean differences of approximately 0.15 -0.20. Greater improvements were also associated with longer-duration interventions. By contrast, limited evidence of moderating effects was obtained for training volume or S&amp;C training experience. Across the included studies, similar standardized mean difference improvements were obtained for strength, power, and jump performance, with pooled mean values close to 0.50. In addition, similar strong relationships were identified across studies for improvement in strength, power, or jump performance and improvement in sprint performance. Weighted regressions estimated that for each SD improvement in the physical variables, sprint performance would be expected to improve by 0.5 -0.8 SD s.

Figure 1. PRISMA flow diagram depicting the search and screening process. PRISMA, preferred reporting items for systematic review and meta-analysis.

<!-- image -->

The studies included in this systematic review and metaanalysis comprised primarily team sport athletes that were novices in S&amp;C (59% of studies) with less than 1 year training experience. In addition, training interventions were generally short, with the median duration for data collection equal to 8 weeks (IQR:6 -9 weeks). No evidence of a moderating effect was identified for experience in S&amp;C. The focus on relatively untrained populations has been viewed as a consistent limitation within S&amp;C research because it is expected that untrained individuals will elicit greater training effects as a result of neural and motor skill adaptations rather than the potential targeted morphological adaptations (63). However, the results from the current review did not provide clear evidence of differences in sprint performance improvements across novice, intermediate, and advanced team sport athletes, categorized based on their S&amp;C training experience. These results are consistent with the findings of a recent meta-analysis (15) conducted with team sport athletes performing either complex or contrast training. Cormier et al. (15) categorized athlete status based on their level of competition as amateurs or professionals and reported substantial overlap in effect size estimates for the groups of sprint times across distances from 10 to 40 m. By contrast, in another meta-analysis conducted with healthy adults, Seitz et al. (55) reported differences across groups based on the level of practice, with some sub-analyses indicating greater improvement in sprinting performance with increasing level of practice. Differences across reviews may be because of several factors including categorization based on either the level of the athlete according to their ability in the sport or their experience regarding S&amp;C. The approach adopted in this review could be considered more relevant when assessing the transfer of training regarding physical improvements within the context of strength and power (47,50,51,61,63,66).

In a recent very large meta-analysis (63), the effects of specificity were clearly identified with coupling between training intervention and outcome shown to result in an approximate 0.2 increase in standardized mean difference compared with noncoupled interventions and outcomes. In this review, considerable overlap in improved sprint performance was obtained for resistance, plyometric, sprint, and combined intervention types. However, some evidence was obtained indicating that the greatest improvements in sprint performance occurred with resistancebased interventions. It is important to note that these results do Effectsize not contradict the specificity findings of the previous large-scale meta-analysis. That is, resistance training was shown previously to result in the largest increases across all outcome measures (strength, agility, jump, sprint, and explosiveness) but that additional increases were obtained when resistance training was combined with strength outcomes (63). By contrast, sprint training was shown to result in the lowest increases across all outcomes measures but that an additional specificity effect occurred so that sprint outcomes were improved to a greater degree. The results from the current meta-analysis identify that these relative general and specific effects seem to balance each other out to some degree, such that each of the training methods results in similar improvements in sprint performance, with potentially resistance training providing the largest improvements in team sport athletes. The findings are in agreement with a recent metaanalysis conducted with football code athletes that showed similar improvements in sprint performance for training methods categorized as primary (sprint technique drills and unresisted sprinting), secondary (forms of resisted sprint training), tertiary (nonspecific sprint training including strength or plyometric training), combined specific (combinations of primary unresisted and secondary resisted sprint training), and combined

<!-- image -->

Figure 2. (Top): Bayesian's forest plot estimating pooled mean across all sprint outcomes. (Bottom): Distributions represent 'shrunken estimates' from individual studies based on all relevant effect sizes, the random effects model fitted, and borrowing of information across studies to reduce uncertainty. Black circles and connected intervals represent the median value and 95% credible intervals for the shrunken estimates. Black dashed line denotes the zero line, with red lines set at 0.5 intervals. CrI, credible interval.

<!-- image -->

Figure 3. (Top): Bubble plot illustrating the relationships between improvements in physical variables (left: strength; right: power; bottom: jump) and sprint performance across intervention studies. (Bottom): Slopes of regression lines: b Strength 0 : 5 5 0.56 (95% CrI: 0.36-0.77); b Power 0 : 5 5 0.80 (95% CrI: 0.50-1.0); b Jump 0 : 5 5 0.78 (95% CrI: 0.57-0.97). CrI, credible interval.

<!-- image -->

(combinations of the tertiary, nonspecific training, and primary or secondary sprint-specific training) (45,46).

The results of this review also highlighted that across all training types, increased intensity resulted in greater improvements in sprint performance. This finding agrees with previous research demonstrating an ordered effect for resistance training interventions and improvements in sprint performance across intensities categorized as light (0.8% improvement), medium (3.3% improvement), and high (5.0% improvement) (55). In this review, the increased effectiveness of higher intensity exercise on improved sprint performance was also demonstrated when comparing free sprint and resisted sprint interventions. Although free sprint training is most specific to the target task of improving sprint performance, the ability to overload and develop physical output during the target task becomes compromised. By contrast, resisted sprint training allows for the ability to overload kinetic outputs such as the production of force and power in opportune directions, while also maintaining high levels of kinematic similarity. In a systematic review of the use of resisted sled training, Petrakos et al. (49) identified that nonspecifically sprint-trained athletes demonstrate greater rates of improvement from interventions that target sprint-specific muscle output or technical efficiency, in which the use of resisted sprint training could encompass both. Research and use of resisted sprint training has gained popularity over recent years (66). However, considerations are required in load selection to balance overload while maintaining levels of specificity. Meta-analysis results from Alcaraz et al. (1) concluded that resisted sprint training (sled towing) was most beneficial with loads , 20%bodymassatupto 20-m distances. More recently, very heavy resisted sled training (80 1 %body mass) has also been shown to improve horizontal force, power, and mechanical efficiency in soccer players with the greatest improvements measured during accelerative sprinting ( , 20 m), with small or unclear improvements in maximum velocity (40). In this review, no evidence of differential improvements in sprint performance were identified across distances of between 5 and 40 m. However, the possibility that differential effects exist within specific training methods is possible.

Tothe authors ' knowledge, this review is the first to implement an extensive analysis approach across many studies to quantify the magnitude of transference from improvements in strength, power, and jump height to improvements in sprint performance of team sport athletes. The results showed similar strong associations between all 3 physical factors and sprint performance with the point estimates of the beta-coefficient ranging from 0.56 to 0.80. In addition, visual inspection of the data indicated that a linear relationship may be appropriate (Figure 3). The results obtained in this review support those by Seitz et al. (55) who reported an absolute correlation value of 0.77 between improvements in the squatting and sprint performance. In the analysis by Seitz et al. (55), precision in effect size estimates were not accounted for when calculating the association. In addition, Seitz et al. (55) included multiple outcomes from the same study without accounting for dependencies in the data. Collectively, not accounting for dependencies and different levels of precision in the data is likely to overestimate confidence in the estimate provided by Seitz et al. (55). In this review a Bayesian approach was adopted using shrunken estimates that borrow information across studies tending to increase precision in study estimates. In addition, this study used a single effect size value from each study informed by the measurement of multiple outcomes and performed a weighted regression accounting for uncertainty in the individual study estimates. The process resulted in similar point estimate to Seitz et al. (55), but uncertainty in the estimate in this study was wider. The findings of this review demonstrate that similar strong relationships were obtained for improvements in power and jump performance with improved sprint performance, which further highlight that implementation of the most effective S&amp;C methods to develop the physical capabilities of team sport athletes should be expected to result in substantive improvements in sprint performance.

Although this review represents the largest systematic review using robust meta-analytic approaches to investigate the effect of S&amp;C interventions on sprint performance within team sports, there are multiple research, process, and statistical limitations that should be considered. Although an extensive literature search was implemented, the process was not exhaustive, and many studies particularly those published in languages other than English are not included. The certainty of the evidence presented in this review was generally low based on evaluations using the GRADEapproach.This was because of the consistent high risk of bias, high risk of inconsistency because of the heterogenous nature of the research regarding many intervention and subjectrelated factors, and frequent risk of small-study effects that have been shown to results in very large and potentially unrealistic effect size estimates (44). Previous meta-analyses have categorized playing level (amateur, subelite, elite) as a moderating variable or indicator of experience, whereas the current analysis included training status based on stated years of S&amp;C experience. However, several studies did not specify subject training history, meaning that this field was estimated based on playing level and values of outcome variables. In addition, future research in the area should consider applications of combined specific training methods such as combinations of free and resisted sprint training versus nonspecific training methods (resistance and plyometric training) and to the type and intensity of load applied during resisted sprint training.

The statistical limitations of the review include those common to many meta-analyses and some specific to the approaches adopted. The use of meta-regressions is generally recommended to explore associations between a limited number of between study factors and effects sizes (24). Most meta-analyses including that presented here, however, are conducted on aggregate data from studies comprising different combinations of potentially relevant factors, including training and subject characteristics. First, estimates from individual meta-regressions may be confounded by imbalances in other factors. Second, it is expected that there will be differences between associations of effects with aggregate study-level data and true associations obtained from individuals, which has been referred to as the ecological fallacy or aggregation bias (64). Third, even where associations from aggregate level data appropriately reflect those at the individual level, there may be limited causal structures such that targeting development in one factor (e.g., strength) may not improve the other (e.g., speed) by the expected magnitude.

<!-- image -->

Statistical limitations specific to this review include the layering of regressions and their shrunken estimates to quantify relationships between changes in sprint performance and strength, power, and jumping. It is possible that this process may have caused additional dependencies within the data, thereby influencing estimates. However, sample sizes were generally consistent across the studies such that the estimates were shrunken primarily based on the magnitude of the effects calculated.

## Practical Applications

The findings from this systematic review and meta-analysis demonstrate that both nondirect and direct S&amp;C training can provide sufficient stimulus when attempting to improve sprint performance in team sport athletes. Evidence was obtained indicating that resistance training may produce the largest improvements, but considerable overlap with other methods should be expected. In addition, more successful S&amp;C interventions regarding development of strength, power, or explosive performance in the form of vertical jumping are expected to result in the largest improvements in sprinting performance. Therefore, practitioners should aim to maximize improvements in such physiological qualities to increase the possible transference to sprinting performance. Collectively, the findings suggest that when attempting to develop sprinting performance in team sport athletes, practitioners should aim to implement periodized training interventions incorporating the most effective S&amp;C interventions to develop strength, power, and explosive ability. In addition, interventions that feature high-intensity loading for each training mode are likely to be the most effective, including resisted sprint training. Based on these results, practitioners and athletes ' can use short periods ( ; 8 -12 weeks), potentially during off-season or preseason, to incorporate high-intensity loading, through nondirect (resistance training, plyometric, or combined) or direct (free sprint or resisted sprint) training methods to overload and promote physiological adaptions likely to lead to improvements in sprint performance. Further research is required to investigate which periodized approaches are most effective; however, the finding that many training types improve sprint performance and the existence of strong positive relationships between magnitude of improvements between physical factors and sprint performance suggests that many contemporary S&amp;C approaches are likely to be effective.

## Acknowledgments

Availability of Data and Materials: Sections of the large data set can be made available from the corresponding author on reasonable request. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors ' contributions: A. Murphy, P. A. Swinton, and K. Burgess designed the protocol. A. Murphy, A. J. Hall, and R. R. Aspe conducted the searches and screened the studies. P. A. Swinton developed and piloted the codebook with ongoing critical input from A. Murphy and K. Burgess. A. Murphy, A. J. Hall, and R. R. Aspe extracted the data. A. J. Hall andR.R.Aspeconductedthequality appraisal of all articles. P. A.

Swinton undertook the statistical analysis with critical input from A. Murphy. A. Murphy and P. A. Swinton wrote the first draft of the manuscript with ongoing critical input from all authors.

## References

1. Alcaraz PE, Carlos-Vivas J, Oponjuru BO, Mart´ ı nez-Rodr´ ı guez A. The effectiveness of resisted sled training (RST) for sprint performance: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Sports Med 48:2143 -2165, 2018.
2. Aquino R, Alves IS, Padilha MB, et al. Multivariate profiles of selected versus non-selected elite youth Brazilian soccer players. J Hum Kinet 60: 113 -121, 2017.
3. Baker D, Nance S. The relation between running speed and measures of strength and power in professional rugby league players. J Strength Cond Res 13:230 -235, 1999.
4. Bauer P, Uebellacker F, Mitter B, et al. Combining higher-load and lowerload resistance training exercises: A systematic review and meta-analysis of findings from complex training studies. J Sci Med Sport 22:838 -851, 2019.
5. Bird SP, Tarpenning KM, Marino FE. Designing resistance training programmes to enhance muscular fitness: A review of the acute programme variables. Sports Med 35:841 -851, 2005.
6. Bolger R, Lyons M, Harrison AJ, Kenny IC. Sprinting performance and resistance-based training interventions: A systematic review. J Strength Cond Res 29:1146 -1156, 2015.
7. Bosch F, Cook K. Specificity within strength training, In: Strength Training and Coordination: An Integrative Approach . Rotterdam: 2010 Publishers, 2015. pp. 181 -226.
8. Brazier J, Antrobus M, Stebbings GK, et al. Anthropometric and physiological characteristics of elite male rugby athletes. J Strength Cond Res 34: 1790 -1801, 2020.
9. Brearley S, Bishop C. Transfer of training: How specific should we be? Strength Cond J 41:97 -109, 2019.
10. B¨ urkner PC. brms: An R package for Bayesian multilevel models using Stan. J Stat Softw 80:1 -28, 2017.
11. Caldwell A, Vigotsky AD. A case against default effect sizes in sport and exercise science. PeerJ 8:e10314, 2020.
12. Challoumas D, Millar NL. Risk of bias in systematic reviews of tendinopathy management: Are we comparing apples with oranges? Transl Sports Med 4:21 -37, 2021.
13. Chiwaridzo M, Ferguson GD, Smits-Engelsman BCM Qualities or skills discriminating under 19 rugby players by playing standards: A comparative analysis of elite, sub-elite and non-rugby players using the SCRuM test battery. BMC Res Notes 12:1 -8, 2019.
14. Cometti G, Maffiuletti NA, Pousson M, Chatard JC, Maffulli N. Isokinetic strength and anaerobic power of elite, subelite and amateur French soccer players. Int J Sports Med 22:45 -51, 2001.
15. Cormier P, Freitas TT, Rubio-Arias J ´ A, Alcaraz PE. Complex and contrast training: Does strength and power training sequence affect performancebased adaptations in team sports? A systematic review and meta-analysis. J Strength Cond Res 34:1461 -1479, 2020.
16. Cronin JB, Hansen KT. Strength and power predictors of sports speed. J Strength Cond Res 19:349 -357, 2005.
17. Cunningham DJ, West DJ, Owen NJ, et al. Strength and power predictors of sprinting performance in professional rugby players. J Sports Med Phys Fitness 53:105 -111, 2013.
18. Duthie G, Pyne D, Hooper S. Applied physiology and game analysis of rugby union. Sports Med 33: 973 -991, 2003.
19. Estrada E, Ferrer E, Pardo A. Statistics for evaluating pre-post change: Relation between change in the distribution center and change in the individual scores. Front Psychol 9:2696, 2019.
20. Feser EH, Macadam P, Cronin JB. The effects of lower limb wearable resistance on sprint running performance: A systematic review. EurJSport Sci 20:394 -406, 2020.
21. Furlong LA, Harrison AJ, Jensen RL. Measures of strength and jump performance can predict 30-m sprint time in rugby union players. J Strength Cond Res 35:2579 -2583, 2021.
22. Gabbett T, Kelly J, Ralph S, Driscoll D. Physiological and anthropometric characteristics of junior elite and sub-elite rugby league players, with special reference to starters and non-starters. J Sci Med Sport 12:215 -222, 2009.
23. Gabbett T, Jenkins DG, Abernethy B. Relative importance of physiological, anthropometric, and skill qualities to team selection in professional rugby league. J Sports Sci 29: 1453 -1461, 2011.
24. Geissb¨ uhler M, Hincapi´ e CA, Aghlmandi S, et al. Most published metaregression analyses based on aggregate data suffer from methodological
25. pitfalls: A meta-epidemiological study. BMC Med Res Methodol 21:1 -9, 2021.
25. Gelman A, Carlin JB, Stern HS, Rubin DB. Introduction to regression models. In: Bayesian Data Analysis . Boca Raton, FL: Taylor &amp; Francis, 2014. pp. 353 -380.
26. Gelman A. Prior distributions for variance parameters in hierarchical models. Bayesian Anal 1:515 -534, 2006.
27. Gissis I, Papadopoulos C, Kalapotharakos VI, et al. Strength and speed characteristics of elite, subelite, and recreational young soccer players. Res Sports Med 14:205 -214, 2006.
28. Guyatt GH, Oxman AD, Vist GE, et al. GRADE: An emerging consensus on rating quality of evidence and strength of recommendations. BMJ 336: 924 -926, 2008.
29. Haugen T, Seiler S, Sandbakk Ø, Tønnessen E. The training and development of elite sprint performance: An integration of scientific and best practice literature. Sports Med Open 5:1 -16, 2019.
30. Issurin VB. Training transfer: Scientific background and insights for practical application. Sports Med 43: 675 -694, 2013.
31. Kawamori N, Nosaka K, Newton RU. Relationships between ground reaction impulse and sprint acceleration performance in team sport athletes. J Strength Cond Res 27:568 -573, 2013.
32. Kirkpatrick J, Comfort P. Strength, power, and speed qualities in English junior elite rugby league players. J Strength Cond Res 27: 2414 -2419, 2013.
33. Kraemer WJ, Ratamess NA. Fundamentals of resistance training: Progression and exercise prescription. Med Sci Sports Exerc 36:674 -688, 2004.
34. Kraemer WJ, Ratamess NA, Flanagan SD, et al. Understanding the science of resistance training: An evolutionary perspective. Sports Med 47: 2415 -2435, 2017.
35. Kruschke JK, Liddell TM. The Bayesian new statistics: Hypothesis testing, estimation, meta-analysis, and power analysis from a Bayesian perspective. Psychon Bull Rev 25:178 -206, 2018.
36. LaPlaca DA, McCullick BA. National football league scouting combine tests correlated to national football league player performance. J Strength Cond Res 34:1317 -1329, 2020.
37. le Gall F, Carling C, Williams M, Reilly T. Anthropometric and fitness characteristics of international, professional and amateur male graduate soccer players from an elite youth academy. J Sci Med Sport 13:90 -95, 2010.
38. Lesinski M, Prieske O, Granacher U. Effects and dose -response relationships of resistance training on physical performance in youth athletes: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Br J Sports Med 50:781 -795, 2016.
39. Little T, Williams AG. Specificity of acceleration, maximum speed, and agility in professional soccer players. J Strength Cond Res 19:76 -78, 2005.
40. Lockie RG, Murphy AJ, Spinks CD. Effects of resisted sled towing on sprint kinematics in field-sport athletes. J Strength Cond Res 17:760 -767, 2003.
41. McBride JM, Blow D, Kirby TJ, et al. Relationship between maximal squat strength and five, ten, and forty yard sprint times. J Strength Cond Res 23:1633 -1636, 2009.
42. McQuilliam SJ, Clark DR, Erskine RM, Brownlee TE. Free-weight resistance training in youth athletes: A narrative review. Sports Med 50: 1567 -1580, 2020.
43. Moher D, Shamseer L, Clarke M, et al. Preferred reporting items for systematic review and meta-analysis protocols (PRISMA-P) 2015 statement. Syst Rev 4:1 -9, 2015.
44. Morin JB, Petrakos G, Jim´ enez-Reyes P, et al. Very-heavy sled training for improving horizontal-force output in soccer players. Int J Sports Physiol Perform 12:840 -844, 2017.
45. Nicholson B, Dinsdale A, Jones B, Till K. The training of short distance sprint performance in football code athletes: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Sports Med 51:1179 -1207, 2021.
46. Nicholson B, Dinsdale A, Jones B, Till K. The training of medium-to longdistance sprint performance in football code athletes: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Sports Med 52:257 -286, 2022.
47. Peterson MD, Rhea MR, Alvar BA. Applications of the dose-response for muscular strength development: Are view of meta-analytic efficacy and reliability for designing training prescription. J Strength Cond Res 19: 950 -958, 2005.
48. Peterson MD, Alvar BA, Rhea MR. The contribution of maximal force production to explosive movement among young collegiate athletes. J Strength Cond Res 20:867 -873, 2006.
49. Petrakos G, Morin JB, Egan B. Resisted sled sprint training to improve sprint performance: A systematic review. Sports Med 46:381 -400, 2016.
50. Plisk SS, Stone MH. Periodisation strategies. Strength Cond J 25:19 -37, 2003.

<!-- image -->

51. RheaMR,AlvarBA,BurkettLN,BallSD.Ameta-analysistodeterminethedose response for strength development. Med Sci Sports Exerc 35:456 -464, 2003.
52. Rhea MR. Determining the magnitude of treatment effects in strength training research through the use of the effect size. J Strength Cond Res 18: 918 -920, 2004.
53. Rumpf MC, Lockie RG, Cronin JB, Jalilvand F. Effect of different sprint training methods on sprint performance over various distances: A brief review. J Strength Cond Res 30:1767 -1785, 2016.
54. S´ aez de Villarreal E, Requena B, Cronin JB. The effects of plyometric training on sprint performance: A meta-analysis. J Strength Cond Res 26: 575 -584, 2012.
55. Seitz LB, Reyes A, Tran TT, Saez de Villarreal E, Haff GG. Increases in lower-body strength transfer positively to sprint performance: A systematic review with meta-analysis. Sports Med 44:1693 -1702, 2014.
56. Sheppard JM, Triplett, TN. Program design for resistance training. In: Essentials of Strength Training and Conditioning (4th ed.). Haff GG and Triplett, TN, eds. Champaign, IL: Human Kinetics, 2015. pp. 439 -470.
57. Sierer SP, Battaglini CL, Mihalik JP, Shields EW, Tomasini NT. The national football league combine: Performance differences between drafted and nondrafted players entering the 2004 and 2005 drafts. J Strength Cond Res 22:6 -12, 2008.
58. Stein JG, Gabbett TJ, Townshend AD, Dawson BT. Physical qualities and activity profiles of sub-elite and recreational Australian football players. J Sci Med Sport 18:742 -747, 2015.
59. Stølen T, Chamari K, Castagna C, Wisløff U. Physiology of soccer: An update. Sports Med 35:501 -536, 2005.
60. Suarez DG, Wagle JP, Cunanan AJ, Sausaman RW, Stone MH. Dynamic correspondence of resistance training to sport: A brief review. Strength Cond J 41:80 -88, 2019.
61. Suchomel TJ, Nimphius S, Stone MH. The importance of muscular strength in athletic performance. Sports Med 46:1419 -1449, 2016.
62. Swinton PA, Lloyd R, Keogh JW, Agouris I, Stewart AD. Regression models of sprint, vertical jump, and change of direction performance. J Strength Cond Res 28:1839 -1848, 2014.
63. Swinton PA, Burgess K, Hall A, et al. Interpreting magnitude of change in strength and conditioning: Effect size selection, threshold values and Bayesian updating. J Sports Sci . 40: 2047 -2054, 2022.
64. Thompson SG, Higgins JPT. How should meta-regression analyses be undertaken and interpreted? Stat Med 21:1559 -1573, 2002.
65. Trecroci A, Longo S, Perri E, Iaia FM, Alberti G. Field-based physical performance of elite and sub-elite middle-adolescent soccer players. Res Sports Med 27:60 -71, 2019.
66. Turner AN, Comfort P, McMahon J, et al. Developing powerful athletes part 2: Practical applications. Strength Cond J 43:23 -31, 2021.
67. Verhagen AP, De Vet HC, De Bie RA, et al. The Delphi list: A criteria list for quality assessment of randomized clinical trials for conducting systematic reviews developed by Delphi consensus. J Clin Epidemiol 51: 1235 -1241, 1998.
68. West DJ, Owen NJ, Jones MR, et al. Relationships between force-time characteristics of the isometric midthigh pull and dynamic performance in professional rugby league players. J Strength Cond Res 25:3070 -3075, 2011.
69. Wilson GJ, Lyttle AD, Ostrowski KJ, Murphy AJ. Assessing dynamic performance: A comparison of rate of force development tests. J Strength Cond Res 9:176 -181, 1995.
70. Wisløff U, Castagna C, Helgerud J, Jones R, Hoff J. Strong correlation of maximal squat strength with sprint performance and vertical jump height in elite soccer players. Br J Sports Med 38:285 -288, 2004.

<!-- image -->